Italy's antitrust body has rejected proposals by sport streaming service DAZN
and its partner Telecom Italia (TIM) as it investigates their deal to
distribute top flight soccer games in Italy, a document showed on Monday. The
Italian competition authority last year opened an investigation into the
partnership, under which TIM secured the right to include DAZN's video app in
its set top box on an exclusive basis, paying an annual fee of 340 million
euros ($354 million).



DAZN had previously bought the rights to screen Serie A soccer matches for
three seasons until 2024 for 2.5 billion euros. While not imposing any
precautionary measures at the time, Italy's antitrust pressed on with the
probe, opened in response to complaints from TIM's rivals as well as consumers
groups.



Both TIM and DAZN had submitted proposals in order to try to allay the
regulator's concerns over a potential restriction of competition in the
telecoms and pay TV markets. But the Italian regulator ruled last week that
the proposed remedies were not enough to address its concerns, a document seen
by Reuters showed.



TIM said it was assessing next steps to take. DAZN did not immediately respond
to request for comment. The Italian regulator declined to comment Under
existing Italian rules, the firms could face a fine of as much as 10% of their
turnover if the authority decides they were in breach of antitrust rules.



Separately, the Italian antitrust body said it will complete the proceedings
by March 31, 2023 from a previous deadline of June 30, 2022, another document
seen by Reuters showed. ($1 = 0.9594 euros)



(This story has not been edited by Devdiscourse staff and is auto-generated
from a syndicated feed.)



Email: info@devdiscourse.com  
Phone: +91-720-6444012, +91-7027739813, 14, 15



Â© Copyright 2022

