BHP will place a hold on part of its South Flank expansion plans in Western
Australia, after it was revealed the expansion would have destroyed upwards of
40 Aboriginal heritage sites.



In documents seen by Guardian Australia, BHP’s archaeological survey
identified rock shelters occupied more than 10,000 years ago, and noted that
evidence in the broader area showed occupation of the surrounding landscape
dated back approximately 40,000 years. BHP’s South Flank expansion puts 86
Aboriginal sites at risk of damage or destruction.



The revelations by the Guardian came following a huge backlash against Rio
Tinto after its expansion in the Pilbara region destroyed a 46,000-year-old
indigenous heritage site.



Section 17 of the Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972 forbids damaging or destroying
Aboriginal heritage sites. Section 18 provides a get out of jail card to
flouting Section 17 – securing consent from the government under Section 18
essentially gives carte blanche to proceed as one pleases without fear of
repercussions under the Act.



Following the Rio Tinto incident, Western Australia’s Minister for Indigenous
Affairs Ben Wyatt said on Twitter it was “a terrible outcome” and “the result
of out of date legislation that doesn’t acknowledge the value of heritage.”



Three days after Rio Tinto’s destruction of the Juukan Gorge heritage site,
Wyatt approved BHP’s South Flank expansion.



Wyatt’s approval of the expansion has been widely condemned – the project puts
up to 86 Aboriginal heritage sites at risk of destruction. But the traditional
owners, the Banjima people, have no means to formally object to the approval
and no means to prevent the sacred sites from being damaged.



“Despite the public outcry when Rio Tinto blew up Juukan Gorge three weeks
ago, Ben Wyatt has continued to grant permits,” Birkbeck, University of London
archaeologist and anthropologist Lawrence Owens said. “Indeed, in the three
years that he has been in power, he has not refused to grant a single Section
18 application for a mining lease that was put before him.”



Section 18 approvals are irrevocable, and there are no allowances for new
discoveries or developments. So the indigenous groups who hold these sites in
such regard for their cultural and historical importance go unheard. There
are, however, appeals processes if a mining company’s Section 18 application
is rejected.



BHP quickly pledged that it would not damage the heritage sites that it
received ministerial permission to destroy without “further extensive
consultation” with traditional owners, the Guardian reported. Previously, the
traditional owners had been legally prevented from speaking out about the
sites.



BHP has proposed several compromises, including recovering and storing
artefacts at its Mulla Heritage Office. The company also offered to “digitally
capture the extent and form of each stone arrangement” with a view to create
three-dimensional computer models and videos of the sites. The Banjima people
have not been willing to accept these proposals.



Owens explains: “BHP seem perplexed that their offer to relocate some sites or
create electronic facsimiles of them away from the mining area have not been
accepted by the Banjima, yet these sites are not comparable to Lascaux caves –
which was reproduced elsewhere for visitors – or Abu Simbel, which was moved
to a new site ahead of the Aswan Dam development. To remove these sites is to
clip out nodes on a vast network of significant places, and thus make them
meaningless; it is comparable to preserving a piece of clothing by cutting out
the patterns and leaving the rest.”



Rio Tinto executives are holding meetings this week after being called in to
explain the company’s destruction of Juukan Gorge to major shareholders. The
widespread backlash to that incident prompted renewed discussions of the
legislative protections of Aboriginal sites and the rights of Australia’s
indigenous population.



Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility executive officer Brynn
O’Brien told the Guardian that Rio Tinto executives had been “surprised” by
the backlash against the company, because it had acted in accordance with
Western Australian laws and longstanding industry practice. According to
O’Brien, investors had been concerned about BHP’s track record with Aboriginal
heritage even before news broke that it had received permission to expand
South Flank.



“Industries are designed to make money, at whatever cost. Cultural heritage is
not in their remit,” said Owens. “So political restrictions exist to ensure
they do not get too powerful, thus social welfare and cultural heritage do not
suffer. Yet it is clear that in the WA case, the impotence of the laws issued
by the latter have favoured the former to a ludicrous degree.”



Wyatt has consistently provided the defence that updated Aboriginal
protections that do away with Section 18 entirely are on their way. With
Juukan Gorge, and now BHP’s expansion plans that risk 86 heritage sites, one
might hypothesise that mining companies, in conjunction with WA’s mining-
friendly government, are fast-forwarding these processes before the door
closes entirely.



Owens continued: “There is little about human history that cannot be recovered
from archaeological research, but if you destroy something, that’s it. There
is no way back. In a thousand years from now – which is a blink of time for
the Aboriginal story – the descendants of modern Aboriginals will be able to
show their children a massive hole in the ground where their heritage used to
be. And all the iron dug out at such great cost will be rust.



“There simply has to be a way to balance the cost of the future with the value
of the past.”



Mining news and in-depth feature articles on the latest mining company deals
and projects covering trends in mineral exploration with up to date data on
the most mined metal and mineral commodities



Powered by ![Pharma Tech Logo](/code/wp-content/themes/goodlife-
wp-B2B/assets/images/verdict-logo-w.png)



© Verdict Media Limited 2022

