**Wealth not trickling down** : a coalition of community organisations, trade
unions, protest groups and consumer associations are calling for a state-wide
civic strike in Colombia's mineral-rich region of La Guajira. Home to the
continent's largest open-pit coal mine, the social movements behind the call
argue that mineral revenues have failed to trickle down. La Guajira's Cerrejón
mine, which is co-owned by London-listed Xstrata, BHP Billiton and Anglo
American, has exported 500 million tonnes of coal since 1976. During that
period however, La Guajira has remained one of Colombia's poorest states. Two
of three (67%) of those living in the north eastern state remain in poverty.
"The mine has ended agriculture and industry, and removed the jobs these
activities created", says Felipe Ustate Perez, president of Fecodemigua, a
non-profit representing communities displaced by mining.



**Weak government institutions** : the mining industry points the finger at
local authorities for sluggish development. "Cerrejón is the largest and most
solid entity in La Guajira", says Juan Carlos Restrepo, the firm's vice
president of public affairs and communications. The company currently
represents around 60% of La Guajira's gross domestic product, he adds: "For
better or worse, we are the company that people look at for their protests or
to get their problems solved." Restrepo blames poor state governance for the
region's on-going problems. The mine's critics agree that levels of state
administration are poor, but argue that the kind of aggressive capitalist
economics symbolised by the likes of Cerrejón lies behind the problem. "The
neo-capitalist system has privatized all the public systems – water,
electricity, gas – leaving the state with no resources to act", says Ustate
Perez of Fecodemigua.



**Royalties redirected** : exacerbating social tensions in La Guajira is a
recent change in Colombia's mining law. Cerrejón claims to have paid more than
$3.9bn in taxes and royalties between 2001 and 2011. While tax revenues have
always gone to the central government, local municipalities used to collect
60% of mining royalties (a total of $336m in 2011, in the case of Cerrejón).
Under new rules, local municipalities now only receive 20% of the royalty
cheque. The rest they have to bid for from central pot. The mining ministry
argues that the revised system will increase accountability in public
spending, and improve project planning and delivery. President Juan Manuel
Santos has an aggressive plan to use Colombia's resource wealth as a driver
for national economic development. While the mining industry welcomes this,
Cerrejón's Restrepo admits that the policy's legitimacy will rest on
delivering tangible benefits at a local level as well. "In the national
context, mining is under question – just as it is in the rest of the world",
he says.



**Community struggles** : in the rural communities surrounding Cerrejón's
operations, life remains tough. Around 67% of the La Guajira population live
in poverty, with 37% classified as 'indigent'. Among the most marginalised are
the region's indigenous Wayúu people. This group depends on animal husbandry
and small-scale agriculture for their livelihood. Following a bad rainy season
earlier this year, many Wayúu communities are experiencing severe water
shortages. "Here we have so many needs, especially water. We have just one
well, but it operates manually which takes a lot of strength and when it dries
up we must rely on neighbouring villages", says Maria Valasquez, a 48 year-old
Wayúu woman from Julujushimana, a village bordering Cerrejón's railway. The
nearby village of Santa Ana has a solar-powered water pump, paid for by the
company. "We want the same here", she says. "And we'd like the company to
build us a road to the highway too."



**Corporate social investment** : Cerrejón has invested $19m in social
programmes over the last two years. Most of its community investment projects
are orientated through four separate foundations, which are run at arms-length
from the company. Their activities focus on what Cerrejón identifies as
priority areas where it can have influence: water, economic progress,
indigenous issues and institutional strengthening. The latter supports efforts
by municipal authorities to pitch for development finance from the new central
royalties' fund, among other activities. Restrepo admits that Cerrejón's
social investment budget falls far short of what's needed to resolve La
Guajira's development problems. As a result, the company targets the
communities in its "sphere of influence" with interventions that are "as
effective as possible". Even so, Cerrejón's corporate responsibility efforts
remain a drop in the ocean: "Even though we spend a lot in the community, it
will take one hundred or one thousand [times] this money and people to change
the lives of these communities", Restrepo says.



**This content is brought to you by** **Guardian Professional** **. Become**
**GSB member** **to get more stories like this direct to your inbox**

