Global miner BHP has temporarily halted production at Goonyella Riverside mine
near Moranbah in Queensland of Australia after a worker died from a medical
emergency, a company spokesman said late July 12.



  



The resumption time has not been announced, but market sources expect the
impact on coal supply to be limited.



  



Goonyella Riverside is a large open-cut coking coal mine in Queensland's Bowen
Basin.



  



(Writing by Emma Yang Editing by Alex Guo)  
_For any questions, please contact us byinquiry@fwenergy.com or
+86-351-7219322._



China's thermal coal imports (incl. lignite, other bituminous coal and other
coal) totaled 22.26 million tonnes in October, with around 99.7% coming from
Indonesia, Russia and Mongolia, according to c



China's installed electricity generation capacity reached 2,495.18 GW by the
end of October, an 8.3% rise from a year earlier, data showed from the
National Energy Administration on November 22.



Four people died in a coal mine accident in N China's Shanxi province on Nov
22, according to emergency management authorities in Shanxi province, Xinhua
reported. The accident happened o



Daqin railway's coal delivery capacity remained in the recovery stage, with
the daily shipment intermittently touching the pre-COVID average of 1 million
tonnes, Sxcoal learned. The coal-



China coking coal, met coke and steel market key figures in focus.



China thermal coal market key figures in focus. The latest data for thermal
coal prices, stocks, shipments in major production areas, transfer ports and
most followed downstream sector data.



China's thermal coal prices accelerated the downward movement on November 22
as more traders tried to sell inventories anticipating worsening demand,
market sources reported. On November



China's second-largest coal production base Inner Mongolia vows to cut the
share of coal consumption below 75% by 2025, and to raise non-fossil fuel
share above 18%, according to the latest carbon pea



Indonesian low-CV thermal coal prices have rebound slightly this week, driven
by higher purchase prices from Chinese utilities, while medium to high-CV
cargoes continued their downward trend due to pe



Some miners in China's top coking coal base Shanxi further increased offers of
the coke-making ingredient on November 22 along with the improved sentiment
amid spreading coke price hike proposals.



The Union Finance Ministry has reintroduced import duties of 5% and 2.5% on
metallurgical coke and coking coal, respectively, which were revoked in end-
May this year. The Russia-Ukraine w



Indonesian spot thermal coal market stabilized with signs of recovering to
close the week, driven by a rise in purchasing prices by Chinese utilities, a
divergent trend from continued downturn in Chin



Coking coal prices remained firm with continued spread of price upward
adjustment in China's major production areas, yet some miners started to be
more cautious in pricing alongside the ongoing stalem



Heavy rainfalls have continued in many parts of southeastern Australia for
several days due to the La Nina weather, causing floods again, the Bureau of
Meteorology said. There had been co



China's Erenhot border port, the largest inland port connecting Mongolia,
imported 2.05 million tonnes of coal during January-October, rising 16.19%
from a year ago. The volume was worth



China's portside thermal coal prices edged down further on November 17,
extending a decline since late October, as traders were still doubt of a price
rally in the near term although the weather start



China pledged to deepen energy security against the backdrop of profound
change in global energy landscape, said the National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC) on November 15. Ener



South Africa has seen a rapid increase in the amount of coal being hauled by
road to Richards Bay Coal Terminal (RBCT) since the coal rail accident last
week. Reuters quoted South Africa'



India will enjoy zero imports duty for coal from Australia after a Free Trade
Agreement between the two countries was finalized on November 22, sources
reported. This came after the FTA o



China's top economic planner plans to place 2.9 billion tonnes of thermal coal
into the medium- and long-term contracts in 2023, up from 2.6 billion tonnes
this year, according to market sources famil



![coal,coal price,coke,China coal,coking coal,thermal coal](/home/images/ico-
whatsapp-new.png) ![coal,coal price,coke,China coal,coking coal,thermal
coal](/home/images/ico-twitter-new.png) ![coal,coal price,coke,China
coal,coking coal,thermal coal](/home/images/ico-linkedin-new.png) ![coal,coal
price,coke,China coal,coking coal,thermal coal](/home/images/ico-facebook-
new.png)



Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Site Map | About Us | Contact Us | Join Us



Shanxi Fensheng Information Services Co., Ltd.



Phone：+86-351-7219322 （Business Hours 08:30-18:00 GMT+8）



Fax：+86-351-4728543 Email：inquiry@fwenergy.com

