



Sexual assault allegations at WA mine sites in Senate spotlight



For the latest flood and weather warnings, search on **ABC Emergency**



Since late 2019, four separate allegations of sexual assault have been
reported by BHP employees and contractors.



Some of them are now before the courts.



But in one case, a perpetrator could not be identified and the alleged female
survivor continues to work for the company.



Another alleged attack was reported at a Newcrest mine site in 2020, and as
recently as April there was an alleged incident at Fortescue Metals.



Rio Tinto has also conceded it has had instances of sexual assault and
harassment, but has not said when.



Minerals Council chief executive Tania Constable has condemned the attacks as
"shocking".



"It's unacceptable, it's illegal and we don't want to see that at all in the
mining industry," she said.



Ms Constable is due to appear before the federal Senate's Education and
Employment Legislation Committee tomorrow, where the allegations will be
examined as part of the committee's inquiry into the Sex Discrimination Act
(Respect at Work) Amendment Bill 2021.



The bill aims to enact legislative changes borne out of Sex Discrimination
Commissioner Kate Jenkins' 2020 Respect at Work report.



The report found the overall rate of sexual harassment in the Australian
mining industry was 40 per cent, 11 per cent higher than the average across
all industries.



But when the statistics were split along gender lines, the survey revealed
women working in the mining sector were twice as likely to be sexually
harassed as their male colleagues (74 per cent compared to 32 per cent).



Ms Constable said in the wake of the report, the mining industry established a
code of conduct to prevent sexual harassment.



"We want to see a number of things occur — that the culture is changing, the
prevention measures and response measures are put in place, and practical
things like assessing a mine site, making sure that it's appropriate for
gendered use — that people feel secure in being able to go to work and then go
back to their accommodation," she said.



The Perth Magistrates Court has heard a woman in her 20s, who was allegedly
raped by a 35-year-old male colleague on a BHP site in November 2020, was
passed out from alcohol at the time.



He was granted bail of $10, 000 and has been sacked by BHP.



Ms Constable said several of the miners recently reduced alcohol limits on
site.



"The industry as a whole is again taking a step back and saying, 'Well, you
know what — what place does alcohol have on a mine site?' and making sure that
we have something that is much more rigorous and much more uniform across the
industry," she said.



"At this stage it is four standard drinks a day, and many companies are
following that guideline."



From last Monday, Rio Tinto introduced a four-drink daily alcohol limit and
said only mid-strength beer and cider would be available for purchase.



Wine sales were now limited to a maximum of two 187ml bottles per person per
day.



At BHP, a daily alcohol limit of four standard drinks per day was introduced
on July 1.



Newcrest would not reveal if it had an alcohol limit.



FMG employees must undergo daily alcohol screening but are allowed up to six
alcoholic drinks a day.



WA Labor Senator Louise Pratt, who is on the Education and Employment
Legislation Committee, pointed out that Ms Jenkins' report found alcohol was
often a contributing factor in workplace sexual harassment.



"I think it is concerning if there is a generalised acceptance of high levels
of drinking [on Australian mine sites]," she said.



She said she had invited the chief executives of several mining companies to
the committee hearings but also hoped to hear from survivors.



"It's difficult for victims themselves to be able to tell their stories and I
would really encourage anyone who has experiences that they would like the
committee to know about, to let us know," Senator Pratt said.



West Australian Liberal MP Libby Mettam has successfully pushed for a state
parliamentary inquiry into the issue and hopes the allegations can be met with
real change.



"I believe there is an opportunity for this industry to be better … so that
women feel comfortable working in these workplaces … and also men who
overwhelmingly do not support any kind of harassment," she said.



In a statement, BHP asset president of West Australian iron ore Brandon Craig
said sexual assault was "completely unacceptable" and had "no place" at BHP.



"In recent years we have brought on more security personnel, patrols and
safety escorts, improved lighting, signage and pathways, upgraded door locks
and chains, and increased CCTV coverage," he said.



"We have plans in place for a further $300 million in upgrades to camp rooms
and improved security measures."



Similarly, in a statement Newcrest said sexual assault was "completely
unacceptable".



"Employees are actively encouraged to report any concerns directly to
management, or if they are uncomfortable in doing so are supported to raise
concerns through our independent and confidential Speak Out service," the
statement said.



FMG CEO Elizabeth Gaines said the company had a "zero tolerance" approach to
harassment.



"Harassment of any kind is considered serious misconduct and may be grounds
for dismissal," she said.



Rio Tinto iron ore chief executive Simon Trott said the company had a
responsibility "to run villages that are safe, respectful and inclusive places
for all of our people, all of the time".



"We have sought feedback from our workforce and carefully considered how we
can improve the experience of living at our villages, promoting respectful
behaviour, and safe and comfortable places to live and work," he said.



We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First
Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and
work.



This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN,
Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be
reproduced.



 **AEST** = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT
(Greenwich Mean Time)

