Owners should park their vehicles outside until they are repaired



August 23, 2022 | Washington, DC



Hyundai Motor America and Kia America recommend that owners of select Model
Year 2020-2022 Hyundai Palisade and Kia Telluride vehicles park their cars
outside and away from homes and other structures until their vehicles have
been repaired, due to new recalls for the risk of fire.



Additionally, a “stop sale” is being issued as of today’s filing, in
accordance with federal regulations, for affected unsold vehicles at dealers
and vehicle processing centers.



The recalls involve 245,030 Model Year 2020-2022 Hyundai Palisade vehicles
(NHTSA ID: 22V-633) and 36,417 Model Year 2020-2022 Kia Telluride vehicles
(NHTSA ID: 22V-626). An accessory tow hitch sold through dealerships may allow
moisture into the harness module, causing a short circuit. In some cases, an
electrical short can cause a vehicle fire while driving or while parked and
turned off.



There are no confirmed fires, crashes or injuries related to this condition in
the United States.



As an interim repair, Hyundai dealers will inspect the tow hitch module and
remove the fuse, as necessary. An interim repair is not available for Kia
vehicles.



The recall repair is under development. When a repair is available, all owners
of vehicles potentially equipped with affected trailer hitch wiring harnesses
will be notified by mail with instructions to bring their vehicles to a
Hyundai or Kia dealer.



Vehicle owners can visit NHTSA.gov/recalls and enter their 17-digit vehicle
identification number to see if their vehicle is under recall. Owners can also
download NHTSA’s SaferCar app for Apple or Android. Enter the vehicle, tires,
car seat, or other vehicle equipment, and the app will push a notification if
a recall is issued.



NHTSA



National Highway Traffic Safety Administration



1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE  
Washington, D.C. 20590



1-888-327-4236  
1-800-424-9153 (TTY)



Twitter Facebook Youtube Instagram



