Username or Email Address



Password



Remember Me





Two resources multinationals were litigated over serious workplace concerns.



BHP Coal was recently sued for allegedly failing to manage occupational health
and safety risks at the Goonyella Riverside Coal Mine, 203km southwest of
Mackay.



The Mining and Energy Union (MEU) claimed the employer took “adverse action”
against outsourced worker Kim Star through demobilising her position and
excluding her from the mine. Labour hire company WorkPac allegedly dismissed
Star three days later. Her only crime was refusing to operate a truck in a
“poorly-lit” area during 2017.



The Federal Court agreed with the Fair Work Commission’s earlier finding that
the woman was unfairly dismissed, and should be reinstated despite BHP’s
objections. The judge slammed the proponent for resorting to “unlawful adverse
action” because the female would not work until vehicle safety concerns were
resolved.



“When she refused to operate in unsafe conditions – as she has the legal right
and the obligation to do – BHP said they did not want her anymore and WorkPac
promptly sacked her,” MEU Queensland district president Stephen Smyth said in
a public statement.



“Multinationals like BHP like using labour hire workers because they are easy
to get rid of. They ultimately call the shots when it comes to employment
arrangements on their mines … [and,] because she has stood up to BHP, it will
now be much harder for them to treat their contractors as disposable labour.”



The remarks came during a separate legal dispute over Bradley Hardwick’s 2019
death at Anglo American’s Moranbah North Coal Mine, 211km southwest of Mackay.



The Brisbane Magistrates Court recently heard a 14-tonne grader allegedly
crushed the victim to death due to a defective park brake. The 47-year-old had
stopped the machine to collect water for engine cooling purposes. The grader
rolled backwards a total of 270 metres before also crashing into a Driftrunner
with 11 passengers. Three people reported injuries.



The prosecution, led by King’s Counsel Joshua Trevino, blamed Anglo for
providing Hardwick with “unsafe” equipment, and failing to discharge health
and safety obligations that resulted in death. One theory is the grader’s
friction plates were “worn down”. The victim’s body also showed evidence of
blunt force injuries, fractured ribs, and both heart and liver lacerations.



However, Anglo defence barrister Saul Holt claims the proponent followed all
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) instructions then criticised the grader
maker.



“The OEM behaved in what can only generously be described as gross negligence.
This was far more than shambolic, this was in fact – as the evidence will
demonstrate – the commission of obvious criminal offences by the OEM,” Holt
said according to News Limited.



The company has since assessed the equipment’s risks, identified design
faults, and stood down similar graders across its New South Wales operations.



Activist accuses coal producer of hiring private investigator  
Mining giant ‘distressed’ after FIFO blade attack  
Industry proposes FIFO workers must declare if they create poor environment  
Mining giant penalised for ‘dangerous’ coal mine.



Comment



Name *



Email *



Website



Notify me of follow-up comments by email.



Notify me of new posts by email.







Δ



 **CONTACT US  
**



**Editorial Enquiries**



Mining Editorial Team



 **Advertising Enquiries**



Garth Wright, Senior Account Manager: 0411 706 426



Over the last twenty years maintaining and improving mine safety has become a
non-negotiable characteristic of responsible and ethical mining companies
throughout Australia and the broader Asia Pacific region. AMSJ connects the
mining industry to the latest mining safety news, events, mine safety legal
information, mine safety history, hazard control technical reports, mines
rescue and emergency and mining safety product and services information.



Submit your details to receive the media kit.



Δ

