Discover Thomson Reuters



By Fumbuka Ng’wanakilala



2 Min Read



DAR ES SALAAM (Reuters) - Tanzania’s mining minister said on Monday Acacia
Mining had been fined 5.6 billion Tanzanian shillings ($2.4 million) for
alleged pollution at its North Mara mine.



Acacia, majority-owned by Barrick Gold, is embroiled in a long-running tax
dispute with Tanzania.



It was forced to cut output by a third after the government banned the export
of mineral concentrates from its two other mines, Bulyanhulu and Buzwagi, in
2017.Tanzania’s National Environment Management Council (NEMC) has issued an
environmental protection order (EPO) relating to alleged pollution from North
Mara’s tailings dam, mining minister Doto Biteko said.”The North Mara gold
mine has been given two weeks to pay the fine and three weeks to rectify the
problem at its tailings storage facility,” Biteko told Reuters.”If the mine
fails to comply to the order, tougher measures will be taken against it.”Last
week Biteko and the country’s environment minister, January Makamba, visited
the mine, where operations remain unaffected despite the crackdown by the
environmental agency. Acacia confirmed on Friday that the mine would be issued
with an EPO relating to alleged historical breaches of environmental
regulations in Tanzania.”The mine’s technical team has been working
constructively and collaboratively with the government of Tanzania to try to
address ... concerns regarding alleged breaches of various environmental
regulations and alleged discharges of a hazardous substance from the mine,”
Acacia said in a statement. Acacia said in January it had been fined 300
million Tanzanian shillings over allegations of breaching environmental
regulations at the mine.The company said it has been asked to build a new
tailings dam, a structure for storing uneconomical ore.Acacia faces a $190
billion tax bill from Tanzanian authorities, which has severely limited the
London-listed company’s operations in the East African nation.



Writing by by Fumbuka Ng’wanakilala; Editing by Hereward Holland and Alexander
Smith



Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of
exchanges and delays.

