Help us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our
work



Share this via Facebook Share this via Twitter Share this via WhatsApp Share
this via Email Other ways to share Share this via LinkedIn Share this via
Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer



Download the full report



Download summary and recommendations



Download the full report



Download summary and recommendations



Human Rights Impacts of Papua New Guinea’s Porgera Gold Mine



Women pan for gold in liquid waste discharged by the Porgera gold mine in
Papua New Guinea. © 2010 Brent Stirton/Getty Images for Human Rights Watch



Many of Papua New Guinea’s most intractable problems are inextricably bound up
with the country’s most promising sources of wealth. Mining, gas, timber, and
other extractive industries are the most productive sectors of Papua New
Guinea’s otherwise ailing economy. But exploitation of these resources has
also led to violence, human rights abuse, corruption, and environmental
damage.



The Porgera gold mine—the subject of this report—is a potent symbol of both
the perils and the financial rewards that extractive industries hold for Papua
New Guinea. The mine is 95 percent owned and solely operated by Barrick Gold,
a Canadian corporation that is the world’s largest gold mining company. It has
been a central part of Papua New Guinea’s economy since it opened in 1990, but
its operations have consistently been mired in controversy and tarnished by
allegations of abuse.



This report is, first and foremost, an attempt to set the record straight on
one of the world’s most controversial—and most misunderstood—mining ventures.
The following pages describe a pattern of violent abuses, including horrifying
acts of gang rape, carried out by members of the mine’s private security force
in 2009 and 2010. They also recount Barrick’s history of angrily dismissing
human rights and environmental concerns that the company should have treated
more seriously and dealt with more transparently. On the other hand the report
also describes how more recently, Barrick has taken some meaningful steps—and
promised others—to address some of the mine’s most serious human rights
problems.



Porgera sits in a remote part of Papua New Guinea’s restive highlands that the
government had largely ignored until the mine’s development. Because of the
mine, Porgera has gone from being a forgotten backwater to one of the primary
engines of the national economy. Since 1990 the Porgera Joint Venture (PJV)
has produced more than 16 million ounces of gold and accounted for roughly 12
percent of Papua New Guinea’s total exports. Barrick acquired the mine in 2006
when it took over Placer Dome, the Canadian company that had developed the
mine and operated it from the time it opened.



The Porgera mine has always been controversial. For years, local activists
have alleged that mine security personnel carry out extrajudicial killings and
other violent abuses against illegal miners and other local residents. The
mine has also been widely condemned for discharging six million tons of liquid
tailings (mine waste) into the nearby Porgera River each year, a dangerous
policy that is not consistent with industry good practice. The relationship
between the mine’s management and its most prominent local critics is deeply
dysfunctional, with both sides often more focused on attacking one another
than addressing issues of mutual concern.



In spite of all the wealth it generates, Porgera still suffers from poverty
and a dearth of basic government services. Government authorities have also
failed to address new local problems that are directly related to the mine’s
development, including the health impacts of mercury use by small-scale and
illegal miners in the area.



Violent insecurity is a chronic problem around Porgera, in part because the
mine has attracted economic migrants, a diverse group including men, women,
and children. Many engage in illegal mining and some participate in violent
crime and other activities that destabilize the area. For most people this
amounts to a dreary and non-violent routine, chipping away at discarded bits
of rock on the mine’s vast waste dumps for a paltry income. But some illegal
miners organize daring, violent raids on the mine’s open pit, underground
tunnels, or stockpile areas, often clashing with mine security personnel.
These raids occur almost every night.



The government has consistently failed to maintain law and order in the face
of these security challenges. There is widespread public distrust of police in
Papua New Guinea due to the force’s reputation for violent abuses and
incompetence. Only a handful of poorly equipped regular police officers are
deployed to Porgera, where they are not just responsible for the mine, but
also for policing a region plagued by violent crime and frequent tribal
fights. Largely for this reason, Barrick employs nearly 450 private security
personnel under PJV’s Asset Protection Department. It is also an important
reason why, in 2009, Barrick agreed to bear most of the cost of a government
deployment of mobile police squads to Porgera. Both courses of action have led
to serious accusations of abuse against the company.



After acquiring the mine in 2006 Barrick took a number of steps intended to
make the security force it inherited from Placer Dome more disciplined and in
line with international norms like the Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights, which Barrick joined in October 2010. But as this report shows,
those steps were inadequate and failed to prevent serious abuses including
abuse of people in custody, excessive use of force, and even gang rape.



Human Rights Watch’s research found that mine security personnel were
generally well-disciplined when faced with the most challenging situations
they have to deal with, violent nighttime raids by illegal miners on the
central areas of the mine. But when operating further afield—and under less
rigorous supervision by superiors—some security personnel have committed
violent abuses against men and women, many of them illegal miners engaged in
nonviolent scavenging for scraps of rock. The abuses investigated by Human
Rights Watch all occurred on or near the sprawling waste dumps around the
mine.



Human Rights Watch documented five alleged incidents of gang rape by mine
security personnel in 2009 and 2010, and a sixth in 2008. We believe these
incidents represent a broader pattern of abuse by some PJV security personnel.
Subsequent investigations carried out by Barrick and by the Papua New Guinea
police in response to Human Rights Watch’s allegations have discovered other
alleged incidents of rape by PJV security personnel, separate from those
documented by Human Rights Watch. In January 2011 PJV announced that it was
firing 6 employees for involvement in, or failure to report, alleged incidents
of sexual violence. Some of those individuals were subsequently arrested by
the police.



Some of the women interviewed by Human Rights Watch described scenes of true
brutality. One woman told how she was gang raped by six guards after one of
them kicked her in the face and shattered her teeth. Another said she and
three other women were raped by ten security personnel, one of whom forced her
to swallow a used condom that he had used while raping two other victims.



Several women said that after arresting them for illegal mining on the waste
dumps, guards gave them a “choice” of submitting to gang rape or going to
prison to face fines and possible jail time. But in some of those cases the
women said that guards raped them even after they pleaded with their
assailants to take them to jail.



In Porgera, rape survivors have few options for assistance or redress. The
women that Human Rights Watch spoke to said they feared reporting abuses to
the authorities given the fear of retribution, the threat of punishment for
illegal mining, and the social stigma that affects rape victims around
Porgera. These fears are heightened in a country where abuses by the police
are endemic and complaints of sexual harassment and violence by police
officers is common. Furthermore, Barrick did not establish safe or accessible
channels for community members to report abuses by Barrick employees directly
to company authorities.



Human Rights Watch also interviewed people who said that mine security guards
beat them up or threatened them after they were already in custody, or that
guards used excessive force to apprehend them. Some people alleged that they
were kicked or punched while lying handcuffed on the ground or on the floor of
security personnel’s cars. Others said that they were tear-gassed or shot with
less lethal projectile weapons without any warning or chance to surrender. One
15-year-old boy told us that security guards threatened to unleash an attack
dog on him after he had already been detained and handcuffed.



In addition to all of this, Barrick has come under considerable fire for
abuses carried out by mobile police squads that have been deployed to Porgera
since 2009 to improve the overall law and order situation in the area. The
company houses and feeds the mobile squads and provides other material support
to them. Some critics argue that Barrick should withdraw this support, but
company officials say the government would not sustain the deployment if it
did so. Overall, the mobile deployment has contributed to a sharp reduction in
violent crime and insecurity around Porgera that is welcomed by most local
residents. But its members have also been implicated in serious abuses, most
notably the 2009 destruction of a community called Wuangima and the forced
eviction of its residents.



Too often, Barrick has responded with dismissive hostility to concerns about
its human rights record at Porgera. But more recently the company appears to
be making substantial efforts to engage more constructively and transparently
with these issues. Human Rights Watch carried on a sustained dialogue with
company officials regarding the allegations in this report. Barrick retained
former Commissioner of Police and Ombudsman Ila Geno to investigate Human
Rights Watch’s allegations and then conducted an in-depth internal
investigation of the entire PJV security force. Company officials ultimately
acknowledged that there are abusive members of the PJV security force and
vowed to remedy the situation. Barrick also committed itself to specific
measures that could improve accountability and reduce opportunities for abuse.
The company has also provided material support to a criminal investigation
into the allegations of sexual violence.



One of Barrick’s most glaring failures at Porgera has been its inadequate
effort to monitor the conduct of mine security personnel working in the field,
especially on relatively isolated parts of the waste dump. Another has been
the company’s failure to establish a safe and accessible channel that people
can use to complain about alleged abuses by security guards or other company
employees. Barrick has committed itself to taking steps designed to address
both failings, described in detail in the pages that follow. Human Rights
Watch welcomes these moves, but their ultimate value will depend entirely on
whether they succeed in preventing abuse and ensuring accountability for
abuses that do occur.



Barrick has also committed to providing Human Rights Watch with copies of its
most current environmental reports when they are finalized, along with other
documents. In Human Rights Watch’s view, the company should have made these
public long ago. Doing so now will allow informed independent scrutiny of the
likely downstream impacts of the mine’s practice of riverine tailings
disposal, which local communities and international campaigners alike have
criticized.



There is one essential component of adequate management of the situation at
Porgera that is still completely lacking: responsible government regulation.
The Papua New Guinea government exercises no meaningful day-to-day oversight
over the Porgera mine’s private security force, and it is not clear that it
has the capacity to do so. In fact, the government has often appeared more
interested in quashing community objections to lucrative extractive projects
than regulating those projects effectively.



Since most of the world’s international mining and exploration
companies—including Barrick— are Canadian, one might expect the Canadian
government to exercise some oversight over its corporate citizens abroad. This
could have particular impact in poorly regulated environments like Papua New
Guinea. But this is not the case; Canada has thus far chosen to exercise
little oversight of Canadian companies operating overseas, including those in
the extractive industry. Legislation that would have empowered government
ministries to exercise a modest degree of scrutiny over the human rights
records of extractive industry companies was defeated in Canada’s House of
Commons in October 2010. The bill was fiercely opposed by the mining industry,
including Barrick, which vocally opposed the bill’s passage. This missed
opportunity challenges Canada’s government, and the industry itself, to
champion new legislation capable of redressing very serious abuses that can
and have happened under the watch of Canadian companies operating abroad.





This report is based primarily on a three-week research mission by a Human
Rights Watch researcher to Porgera and Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. Human
Rights Watch carried out 92 interviews with Porgeran landowners, victims, and
eyewitnesses of abuse at Porgera, people who had been detained by PJV security
personnel, local activists, company officials, medical personnel, illegal
miners, current and former PJV security personnel, Porgera Environmental
Advisory Komiti (PEAK) officials, independent analysts, and police and
judicial officials.



We also carried out interviews with experts on extractive industries and
policing in Papua New Guinea at The Australian National University in
Canberra, Australia. Human Rights Watch consulted with former PJV employees
and with independent experts on mine tailings disposal and related
environmental and health issues.



The names and other identifying details of some interviewees—including all
victims of or witnesses to human rights abuses at the Porgera mine—have been
withheld at their request or to prevent possible reprisal against them.
Interviews referenced in footnotes as having taken place in “Porgera” took
place either in Porgera Station, Paiam Town, Laigam, on or near one of the
waste dumps surrounding the mine, or in one of the communities scattered
around the mine’s Special Mining Lease or Lease for Mining Purposes area.



After the research in Papua New Guinea was complete, Human Rights Watch
engaged in an extended dialogue with Barrick officials. Barrick provided a
20-page letter in response to a series of questions about the company’s human
rights and environmental practices and the allegations in this report. Company
officials also hosted a day-long meeting at Barrick’s Toronto office on
September 9, 2010, to discuss the report’s allegations and measures the
company is taking to address them. In December 2010 Barrick sent Human Rights
Watch another letter explaining actions the company has taken in response to
Human Rights Watch’s allegations of violence by PJV security guards. All of
Barrick’s input was fully incorporated into this report, and the December 2010
letter is attached as an annex.



Human Rights Watch also participated in a second day-long meeting between
Barrick officials and NGO representatives in connection with Barrick’s
application to join the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
That meeting, which was off-the-record, dealt with human rights concerns that
largely overlapped with many of the issues discussed in this report. In
November 2010 Human Rights Watch carried out a one-week follow-up visit to
Porgera, meeting with company officials to discuss Barrick’s efforts to
address Human Rights Watch’s concerns and with local community members to
discuss important human rights issues.



Papua New Guinea is a poor country that possesses a wild abundance of natural
resources.[1]Mining in particular has long been one of the country’s most
important economic engines, as of 2002 the industry accounted for 75 percent
of exports and 21 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).[2]And the country’s
extractive industries sector continues to grow: an ambitious liquefied natural
gas project led by ExxonMobil, now in its early stages of development, could
double Papua New Guinea’s GDP over the next three decades.[3]



Many Papua New Guineans believe that these industries are their country’s
best—and perhaps only—realistic avenue to economic development. But as is true
in many developing countries, Papua New Guinea’s extractive resources have
proved to be as much a curse as they have a blessing. Extractive projects and
the economic resources they represent have fueled violent conflict, abuse, and
environmental devastation in Papua New Guinea.[4] Government revenues from
extractive industries are often dissipated through official corruption and
mismanagement, without having any positive impact on ordinary citizens’
lives.[5]



The Porgera gold mine is in many ways emblematic of both the promise and the
pitfalls of Papua New Guinea’s extractives sector. Located in a remote corner
of Papua New Guinea’s highland Enga province, the mine is owned by a company
called the Porgera Joint Venture (PJV). PJV in turn is 95 percent owned by
Barrick Gold, a Canadian company that is the world’s largest gold producer.[6]
The remaining five percent stake in PJV is held by Mineral Resources Enga, a
company that is jointly owned by the Enga Provincial Government and the
landowners of Porgera.



Barrick acquired the Porgera mine in 2006 when it purchased Placer Dome, the
company that had developed the mine and operated it since it began production
1990.[7] Barrick was already a large international company when it purchased
Placer Dome, but it came of age as a company with that acquisition, increasing
dramatically in size and taking on board several complex and troubled
operations, including the Porgera mine.[8] Since 2006 Barrick has been the
mine’s sole operator.



Gold mining was not entirely new to Porgera when PJV arrived on the scene;
small-scale alluvial mining downstream from the modern mine had long been an
important part of the local economy. Still, prior to the mine’s development,
Porgera was one of the most remote, impoverished, and marginalized areas in
the whole of Papua New Guinea. Geographically isolated by a dramatic landscape
of steep valleys and rain-soaked mountains, the area lacked good road or air
connections to the rest of the country. For years the government had
essentially left Porgera and its Ipili-speaking people to fend for
themselves.[9]



The sprawling mine has brought dramatic change to surrounding communities,
especially for landowners on the Special Mining Lease (SML) and Lease for
Mining Purposes (LMP) where the mine’s operations take place. PJV employs some
2,400 people and has paid out more than 280 million kina (K), or US$106
million, in royalty payments to local landowners and the Enga Provincial
Government.[10] These benefits are tremendously important; as one expert
noted, many Porgerans have always seen the mine as “their only possible chance
to catch up to the rest of Papua New Guinea after years of neglect.”[11]But
the mine’s development has also led to many destructive changes, including
increased levels of violence, prostitution, alcoholism, sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs), economic inequality, and other social ills.[12]



Since becoming operational in 1990, the Porgera gold mine has produced well
over 16 million ounces of gold, an amount that would be worth more than $19
billion at 2010 prices.[13] In 1992 the mine was the third largest gold
producer in the world.[14] Productivity has declined since then with the
exhaustion of the mine’s highest-grade deposits, but the PJV mine remains a
tremendously important part of Papua New Guinea’s national economy. In 2009
the 572,595 ounces of gold it produced was valued at K1.5 billion ($570
million)—12.6 percent of the country’s total exports that year.[15] The mine
is currently projected to operate through 2023.[16]



The Porgera mine has had a dramatic impact on its environment. The operation
has largely obliterated a peak called Waruwari hill by creating a massive open
pit whose stepped rock walls fall hundreds of feet from the pit’s upper
reaches to its floor.[17]The pit bustles around the clock with workers and
heavy equipment. Human Rights Watch’s researcher observed rocks the size of
cars crashing down unstable portions of the pit wall.



The upper reaches of the nearby Porgera river run red, stained by 16,000 tons
of tailings (liquid mine waste) that PJV discharges into the river every
day.[18] The mine has also spawned three vast dumps of waste rock—stone with
such low quantities of gold ore that it is not economical to process— and
these have buried huge tracts of bush, forest, and farmland as they grow. Two
of the dumps are designed to be erodible and have advanced down the
mountainside like glaciers of mud and rock, consuming everything in their
path.[19]



Mining operations at Porgera have lasted longer and grown larger than
originally expected.[20]The expansion of the mine and its sprawling waste
dumps has greatly reduced the amount of land available to adjacent communities
for cultivation and living space. At the same time the population has soared
from roughly 6,000 to somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000, largely due to
economic migration from other parts of Enga province and beyond. Young people
in particular often complain that they have seen no benefit from compensation
agreements negotiated with their elders, and that the scarcity of land means
that they can neither build houses of their own nor turn to the soil to earn a
living.



Largely because of these issues, the vast majority of landowners believe
Barrick should relocate all of them to new land away from the mine.[21] “We
want to move out where there is a bigger place and where we can move around,”
one landowner told Human Rights Watch, “instead of living like rats.”[22]



In 2007 Barrick hired a firm to develop a plan to relocate most or all of the
Special Mining Lease population, but the idea was ultimately abandoned,
angering many local community leaders. Barrick maintains the plan was
conceived as a prerequisite to a planned expansion of the mine that never took
place, robbing the hypothetical exercise of its intended purpose.[23] But a
draft copy of the relocation plan’s social impact assessment stated that
“resettlement is driven by the need both to secure the land required for
expansion of PJV’s operations and to improve living conditions in PJV’s host
communities.” In addition the draft impact assessment found that:



The report also noted that 84 percent of surveyed SML landowners believed that
life was much worse than it had been five years before.[24]



Barrick acknowledges that in the next few years it will have to relocate
several hundred households that are “impacted by mining activities to an
unacceptable degree, specifically, where there is a risk of geotechnical,
health or other safety impacts.” Indeed the company has ongoing plans to
relocate several hundred households, and has budgeted $40 million for
“relocation activities” between 2010 and 2014.[25] But Barrick maintains that
wholesale relocation of the population immediately surrounding the mine is
unnecessary. It also argues that past efforts to explore its feasibility
revealed that the exercise would be so complex as to be impossible in
practical terms.[26]



Some former PJV employees and consultants disagree, arguing that it could be
possible to gradually relocate all mining lease area landowners before the
projected closure of the mine sometime after 2023.[27] One former PJV employee
told Human Rights Watch, “The test should be, ‘Would this be acceptable if it
were in my own back yard?’ ... That’s clearly not the case for many people
[around Porgera].”[28] On the other side of the issue, one optimistic Barrick
official speculated that if the mine closes in 2023, most of Porgera’s
problems will automatically resolve because at that time “the [economic
migrants] will all leave. The locals will have their education and the other
dividends of PJV having been there.”[29]



One serious barrier to addressing contentious issues related to the mine is
Barrick’s mutually antagonistic relationship with the Porgera Landowners
Association (PLOA). The PLOA was conceived as a representative body with a
mandate to speak for landowning communities and advocate for their collective
interests. It was established to represent landowners in negotiating important
issues with the company or liaising with relevant government institutions.



The PLOA leadership and Barrick generally behave less like negotiating
partners than mortal enemies. PLOA leaders have been consistently and vocally
critical of PJV—often in vitriolic terms—and long-serving PLOA Chairman Mark
Tony Ekepa regularly travels to Canada to protest at Barrick’s annual
shareholder meeting.[30] Barrick officials, for their part, try to cut the
PLOA out of their dealings with local communities as much as possible. In
interviews with Human Rights Watch, Barrick officials described the PLOA’s
leadership as focused on exploiting local grievances for their own financial
gain rather than acting in good faith as intermediaries between the company
and local communities.[31]



The essence of the allegations leveled against the PLOA by Barrick officials
and aggrieved community members is that the organization’s leaders are lining
their pockets with royalty payments that might otherwise flow to ordinary
landowners. The PLOA is a well-resourced institution: in 2009 it received K3.6
million ($1.4 million) in royalty payments, a figure comparable in scale to
the K4.5 million ($1.7 million) in royalties paid out in direct distributions
to all of the SML’s landowners that year.[32]But there is no transparency as
to how the organization spends its money. None of the landowners interviewed
by Human Rights Watch—including several people on PLOA’s board—had ever seen a
detailed accounting of how the organization uses its financial resources. Some
said that they had spent considerable energy trying to get this information,
without success.[33]



When Human Rights Watch asked for a copy of the PLOA’s budget, the deputy
chairman of the PLOA maintained that only the organization’s chairman had
access to it (the chairman was out of the country when Human Rights Watch
carried out our research in Porgera). Asked to describe generally how the PLOA
spends its money, the deputy chairman mentioned “staff such as computer
operators and so on” for each of the landowner representatives on the PLOA’s
board. In fact, none of those representatives have any staff at all, let alone
“computer operators.”[34]If the PLOA does produce an end-of-year expenditure
report, none of the PLOA officials or landowner representatives interviewed by
Human Rights Watch knew about it.



Many Porgeran landowners—including some of the very people who serve on the
PLOA’s board—express deep concern and even outrage at the opacity surrounding
the PLOA’s finances. One landowner on the PLOA’s board told Human Rights Watch
that he and other board members had repeatedly asked for expenditure reports,
only to be rebuffed.[35] Landowners have become divided into factions who
support and oppose the PLOA leadership, and political infighting between the
two sides has consumed considerable energy and resources, to no productive
end.



One does not have to look far to see how things could be handled better. For
example, the Lihir Mining Area Landowners Association—the equivalent of the
PLOA around the Lihir gold mine on Papua New Guinea’s Niolam Island—published
an audited report of its 2008 expenditures in a local newspaper.[36]



The PLOA’s executive leadership did not respond well to questions about the
organization’s finances. Instead of responding to substantive concerns about
financial mismanagement, PLOA Chairman Mark Tony Ekepa merely asserted to
Human Rights Watch that all the people complaining about the PLOA’s lack of
financial transparency were “paid by the company” to discredit him. PLOA
official Anga Atalu echoed this absurd allegation, saying of the PLOA’s many
critics that “their words have been fed to them by Barrick.” Then, becoming
visibly angry, he demanded that Human Rights Watch stop pursuing the issue:
“This is not among the issues you are investigating! It is not your interest
to know what we are doing on this! It is not relevant and we do not wish to
respond to these allegations.”[37]



In recent years PLOA leaders have exerted considerable energy trying to force
PJV to negotiate relocation packages through them instead of directly with
individuals and communities who need to be moved from their homes. Ekepa and
his supporters maintain that this is a principled position designed to force
the company to deal with the broader issue of relocation, and prevent it from
isolating small groups of landowners and pressuring them to accept bad
deals.[38] On the other hand, Barrick officials and some landowners allege the
PLOA leadership is mainly concerned with steering cash payments through their
own hands.[39] “We are never going to negotiate with the PLOA on benefit
packages or give them to them to channel,” one company official said. “If we
do, the benefits will never get to where they are supposed to go.”[40]



Porgera, like many other parts of Papua New Guinea’s notoriously restive Enga
province, is plagued by diverse forms of violence ranging from tribal warfare
and armed robbery to widespread domestic violence.[41] The presence of the PJV
mine has exacerbated this long-standing problem.[42] The mine has attracted
thousands of migrants from other parts of the highlands, which has helped the
local population surge from roughly 6,000 people in 1989 to somewhere between
30,000 and 50,000 today.[43]This runaway growth has exacerbated social
problems, including widespread violence, alcoholism, and grinding poverty.[44]



Porgera has at times approached true lawlessness. A joint PJV/government
report noted that “[v]iolent crimes against the person, in particular, have
increased in recent years, with reported rates of murder, assault, sexual
assault against women and violence against children all rising over recent
years”, and that tribal fighting “increased dramatically in Porgera district”
in the years leading up to 2007, with an estimated 70 people killed in such
conflicts that year.[45] One scholar, working with local magistrates,
documented 59 separate incidents of clan warfare around Porgera between 2006
and 2009.[46]



The Papua New Guinea government has failed to install an adequate regular
police presence around Porgera. As of May 2010 there were only 17 regular
police officers posted to the police station in Paiam town and they did not
possess a functioning automobile.[47] More than 12 years ago the government
agreed to increase the number of regular police officers stationed at Porgera
to “a minimum of 30,” but this never happened.[48] The police have generally
failed to maintain any semblance of law and order in local communities, let
alone deal with the complex security issues facing the mine.



This state of affairs poses immense challenges to PJV’s operations. In the
absence of any meaningful regular police presence, the mine is forced to
maintain a large private security force.



The most serious security problem this force confronts on a routine basis is
widespread illegal mining on PJV property. Almost all of the abuses described
in this report occurred in the course of PJV security personnel’s efforts to
confront illegal miners and other trespassers on mine property. But while all
illegal mining entails trespassing onto mine property to illegally obtain ore,
there are two very different kinds of illegal mining taking place at Porgera
every day. Paradoxically, the victims of almost all the abuses described in
this report were the illegal miners who pose the least threat of violence or
danger to the mine.



Every day hundreds of illegal miners trespass onto the mine’s sprawling
Anjolek, Anawe, and Kogai waste dumps, searching for scraps of rock that
contain salvageable quantities of gold. They are a diverse group that includes
men, women, and children of all ages. Almost every day—and often well into the
night—it is possible to see people working alone or in groups scattered across
different parts of the dumps, squatting on the ground, and chipping away at
bits of rock with chisels and hammers. Their efforts to grind a living out of
the mine’s fields of discarded rock generally yield a paltry but fairly steady
income. Most miners interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they took
between K50 and K70 ($25-35) worth of gold from the waste dumps in an average
week.[49]



Most of the illegal miners also said that they viewed the mine, including its
waste dumps, as their de facto “garden,” a place they had no choice but to
harvest as best they could.[50] One man living near the site told Human Rights
Watch, “I get up there early at six o’clock, just like the people who work at
the mine. If I’m lucky I can come back with enough to buy a packet of rice or
some other food. Otherwise, I stay down there until I find something.”[51]



The waste rock is of no value to PJV, and the illegal miners on the waste
dumps are for the most part engaged in a dreary but entirely nonviolent
routine. But company officials told Human Rights Watch that if left unchecked,
illegal mining activity would draw vast numbers of people, posing serious
security threats to the mine and to PJV personnel dumping rock on the
dumps.[52]For those reasons, PJV security patrols regularly try to chase away
or arrest illegal miners they find on the waste dumps, and violent clashes
sometimes follow.



In sharp contrast to the monotonous routine that characterizes illegal mining
on the waste dumps, a much smaller number of illegal miners organize violent
raids on the mine’s open pit operation, stockpile, or underground areas. The
raids typically occur late at night and happen almost every day.Dozens of
illegal miners—and in some cases well over 100—rush into the pit or rappel
down its steep rock walls and then try to fight off or elude any PJV security
personnel sent out to repel them. Many are armed with bush knives (machetes).
The goal of these raids is often to push into areas where rock newly blasted
from the pit walls bearing high concentrations of valuable ore is heaped on
the floor of the open pit.



Human Rights Watch interviewed several illegal miners who frequently
participate in these raids. None attempted to conceal the violent nature of
their tactics. One young man described the raids this way:



These violent raids are an enormous threat to the security of the mine and its
employees. From the perspective of many PJV security guards, they are a
terrifying spectacle. One PJV security officer described the encounters this
way:



Under Papua New Guinean law, illegal mining is punishable by up to four years
in prison or a K10,000 ($3,800) fine.[55] The magistrate judge in Paiam town
who tries and sentences illegal miners told Human Rights Watch that many
people view these penalties as draconian when applied to people working
peacefully on the waste dumps:



Despite the harsh penalties, criminalization has proved ineffective as a means
of dealing with the problem. According to local judicial officials, 476 people
were convicted of illegal mining under the Mining Act in 2009 and another 143
between January and April 2010.[57] But Paiam’s magistrate told Human Rights
Watch that this had little meaningful effect as a deterrent and that many
convicted illegal miners were openly defiant. “In court they will tell you, “I
will come back! That is my garden!” he said.[58] According to Barrick, illegal
miners staged more than 25,000 recorded incursions onto mine property
(including the waste dumps) in 2009, and 9,600 during the first eight months
of 2010.[59]



Human Rights Watch interviewed many people who had been arrested and fined or
imprisoned for illegal mining: almost all said they intended to continue with
the activity, often because they felt they had no choice.[60] In some cases
the primary impact of harsh criminal penalties for illegal mining around
Porgera has been as a different kind of deterrent. Some PJV security personnel
have used the threat of fines or jail time to dissuade illegal miners from
complaining about violent human rights abuses.



PJV employs a private security force to protect the mine and its employees,
which is run by the company’s Asset Protection Department (APD). As of
September 2010 the APD force consisted of 443 personnel divided into three
broad categories—279 “local hires” who are recruited from around Porgera, 153
“national hires” recruited from across Papua New Guinea, and 11 expatriates in
training and supervisory roles.[61] APD maintains an investigations unit that
is responsible for investigating allegations of abuse and breaches of company
policy by APD personnel. PJV’s budget for security was $10.2 million in
2010.[62]



APD personnel patrol and guard the mine site, including the waste dumps around
the mine. They also apprehend and detain illegal miners, but in theory PJV
rules do not permit them to detain people on the waste dumps unless they are
engaging in illegal mining or other criminal activity. For example, many
people use the waste dumps as a shortcut to walk between their communities and
Porgera Station or other communities, and APD personnel are instructed not to
arrest them.[63]



PJV maintains a detention facility on the mine site, and illegal miners caught
by APD personnel often spend a night there before being transferred into
police custody in neighboring Paiam town.[64] Barrick states that APD
personnel also assist with filing a complaint against the accused and testify
against them in court if needed.[65]



APD’s local hires generally have no background in security work and do not
carry firearms; PJV uses them primarily to carry out relatively
straightforward tasks like guarding fixed positions and acting as points of
contact with illegal miners and other community members. According to Barrick,
the local hires “do low risk activities—manning gates and other fixed
positions, or [taking on] negotiation roles where they are the second point of
contact behind Community Relations guys with illegal miners and so on.”[66] In
contrast, many of APD’s “national hires” have a police or military background.
Some are police reservists, and at least a few are regular police officers who
have taken extended leave from their jobs to accept better-paid positions with
PJV.[67] The national hires do the heavy lifting; they are assigned the most
dangerous duties, including confronting illegal miners in the open pit, and
they constitute the bulk of APD personnel who carry firearms.



When Barrick acquired the Porgera mine in 2006, it inherited a security force
that local activists had long accused of carrying out extrajudicial killings
and other violent abuses. The alleged victims were people caught trespassing
on mine property, most of them illegal miners.



A 2005 report by a local organization called the Akali Tange Association (ATA)
alleged PJV guards had shot and killed at least nine people between 1996 and
2005 under circumstances that were impossible to justify, and injured several
others.[68]In November 2005, Placer Dome—then the mine’s operator and majority
owner—publicly acknowledged that police and PJV guards had shot and killed
eight people between 1996 and 2005 (including seven since 2000), but
maintained the killings were all carried out in self-defense.[69]



The ATA report also accused PJV personnel of killing several other people by
pushing them into the mine’s open pit or crushing them with heavy rocks, but
provided little evidence to support the latter allegations.[70] PJV allegedly
paid cash compensation in some cases to relatives of people killed or injured
by PJV security guards in return for agreements barring the recipients from
pursuing legal action against the company.[71]In April 2010 a former PJV guard
was convicted of murder for a shooting death that took place on the mine site
in 2002.[72]



The ATA report was controversial in part because its authors negotiated
agreements with the families of deceased individuals that empowered the
organization to seek monetary compensation for the alleged killings, and then
gave ATA officials the right to divide any eventual payments between the
families and the organization however they saw fit.[73] By 2010, some families
whose agreements had also required them to provide a “non-refundable sum” of
K2000 (US$ 780) to the ATA so the organization could pursue their claims were
highly disgruntled because, years later, they had received nothing in
return.[74]



The Papua New Guinea government commissioned an inquiry into killings around
the PJV mine in 2005, but its results were never made public. The government
has never given a reason for its decision not to publish the
results.[75]Barrick officials said they could not confirm that abuses took
place prior to the company’s purchase of Placer Dome.[76]



Many APD personnel are former police officers, police reservists, or police on
extended leave from their jobs. These personnel come to PJV with links to an
institution well on its way towards what one expert described to Human Rights
Watch as “advanced institutional collapse.”[77]Violent abuses have become a
routine part of the police’s interactions with the public, and police
personnel regularly engage in widespread abuses, including torture and
rape.[78]





In May 2010 the UN special rapporteur on torture traveled to PNG and
documented police abuses, including routine beatings of criminal suspects that
often rise to the level of torture, as well as extortion of sex from female
detainees in exchange for their release. The special rapporteur noted that,
“Some officers also appear to frequently arrest women for minor offences with
the intention of sexually abusing them.”[79] Fear of sexual harassment and
violence by police inhibits effective functioning of the justice system since
victims are often afraid to report crimes to the police.



In addition to these patterns of police abuse, rape—and in particular gang
rape or “pack rape” as it is called in Papua New Guinea—is a disturbingly
common crime throughout the country.



All of this means that Barrick should have been well aware of the serious
potential for violent abuses to occur and could have prioritized setting up
effective systems to prevent and respond to such abuse when it took over the
Porgera mine in 2006. In fact, the patterns of abuse by APD personnel
described in this report largely mirror broader patterns of abuse by PNG
police.



Human Rights Watch’s research revealed that some APD personnel at Porgera
engaged in violent abuses with impunity in 2009 and 2010. Human Rights Watch
investigated several alleged cases of gang rape by APD personnel, as well as
instances where APD personnel have allegedly beaten people in their custody or
used excessive force apprehending them. None of these abuses took place during
violent raids by illegal miners on the mine’s central open pit, where APD
personnel are under the direct scrutiny of their superiors. Rather, they all
involved APD personnel patrolling relatively isolated expanses of the mine’s
waste dumps.



Human Rights Watch investigated five incidents of alleged rape by PJV security
personnel in 2009 and 2010, and one in 2008. Human Rights Watch interviewed
women who were among the victims of five of these incidents and one woman who
provided a detailed eyewitness account of another gang rape. Five other women
interviewed by Human Rights Watch alleged they were threatened or taunted with
the prospect of rape after APD personnel arrested them.



Human Rights Watch believes that the incidents of sexual violence we
investigated are part of a broader pattern of abuse. We heard of other alleged
victims we could not locate or who declined to speak with us. In addition, the
powerful stigma attached to rape survivors in PNG (discussed below) means that
many rape victims keep their ordeals to themselves. Barrick and the Papua New
Guinea police both launched investigations into alleged acts of sexual
violence by APD personnel in response to the allegations put forward by Human
Rights Watch.[80]Those investigations, both ongoing as of November 2010,
uncovered alleged incidents of sexual violence separate from those
investigated by Human Rights Watch.[81] In January 2011 Barrick announced that
it had fired 6 employees for involvement in, or failure to report, alleged
incidents of sexual violence. Some of those individuals were subsequently
arrested by the PNG police.[82]



The allegations of rape documented by Human Rights Watch shared several key
elements:



· **All of the incidents were gang rapes** by APD personnel.



· **All of the incidents took place on or near the waste dumps surrounding the
mine**. Most victims were women who were illegally mining on the waste dumps.



· **Many of the victims said their attackers told them they would face large
fines or prison time if they tried to complain after the fact,** because they
had been carrying out illegal mining on PJV property. Some women said that APD
personnel presented them with a “choice” of going to prison or submitting to
gang rape and then being set free—but then still gang raped some of the women
who insisted on being taken to prison.



· **Most of the victims said that they were brutally beaten** in addition to
being raped. Most were kicked or punched by their assailants; one woman was
kicked in the face just before being raped and lost several teeth.



· **None of the victims reported the incidents to either police or company
officials.** All said either that they did not know where they could safely
complain to, were afraid that they would suffer reprisals if they did report
the crimes, or both. Some women said that their attackers said they would be
imprisoned or fined for illegal mining if they tried to complain about what
had happened.



One woman in her early 30s told Human Rights Watch that around the end of
September 2009, she was gang raped by five APD personnel who caught her on the
Kogai waste dump. She was not an illegal miner herself but had gone to the
dump in hopes of selling betel nut to the illegal miners working there:



The APD personnel forced her into the back of their land cruiser and took
turns raping her. When they had finished they took her out of the car, threw
her on the ground, and kicked her several times. Then they left, but not
before warning her that she would be punished for trespassing if she tried to
report the crime:



She never reported the crime.“I was scared to go to the hospital or police
station,” she said. “I was afraid they would say, ‘There is one of the people
who go up there to steal,’ and lock me up.”[83]



Another woman told Human Rights Watch that five APD personnel gang raped her
after catching her on the same waste dump around February 2010. She said that
she and her husband were arrested together. The guards put her husband into a
car and drove him away, while she was raped in some bushes near the edge of
the dump:



After the guards finished raping her they let her go. “After they raped me I
was lying on the ground for about two hours,” she recalled. “Then I went into
a stream [near] there and washed myself and I walked home.” She did not report
the crime. “I thought of doing that but since my husband was taken to jail I
had no one to support me in going there so I just left it that way. I was
scared they might just lock me up in the cell.”[84]



In 2009, a research team from Harvard and New York University (NYU) law
schools submitted evidence to the Canadian parliament that APD personnel had
been involved in numerous incidents of rape targeting women caught on mine
property.[85]





The team reported on ten alleged incidents of sexual violence (all separate
from the incidents described in this report), including eight rapes, and
stated that “the accounts generally share[d]” several characteristics: the
rapes occurred on mine property; the victims were gang-raped by groups of PJV
security guards; they were beaten in addition to being raped; some were
threatened with imprisonment if they did not submit to being raped; and women
generally did not report or file complaints about the incidents.”[86] These
traits largely mirror those of the incidents of gang rape investigated by
Human Rights Watch.



Barrick issued a formal response to the Harvard/NYU allegations, stating that
“to our knowledge, there have been no cases of sexual assault reported to mine
management involving PJV security personnel while on duty, since Barrick
acquired its interest in the mine in 2006.” It urged anyone who had
information about such an incident to report it to the proper Papua New Guinea
(PNG) government authorities but did not commit to action itself.[87]



The Harvard/NYU research team also reported on several alleged killings by APD
personnel or police around the mine since 2006, and numerous instances of
beatings and other forms of physical abuse, both before and after Barrick
acquired the mine.[88]



A third woman told Human Rights Watch that APD personnel gang raped her on the
Kogai waste dump in January 2009. “The people together with me saw the
security and ran away,” she said. “I was also trying to run away but I tripped
on a stone and I fell down. Six security [personnel] held me.” She said:



All six guards raped her on the ground in a relatively isolated area near
their car. Afterwards they left her lying on the ground. Although in great
pain, she walked up to a road where she could catch a public bus. “Someone
just held my hand and helped me to walk up,” she said. She did not report the
crime to anyone; her attackers had said that if she did, she would be arrested
for stealing gold from the waste dump. “When these security raped me they said
I could go to prison for two to five years,” she said, “and that’s why I was
afraid to tell anyone.”[89]



Fear of imprisonment and mistrust of the authorities is not the only thing
that prevents women from reporting incidents of rape. The social stigma that
attaches to rape around Porgera is strong enough to ruin lives and lead to
further violence in the home.



One woman told Human Rights Watch that she was gang raped by a group of PJV
guards and did not tell anyone, including her husband. Nonetheless, he found
out about the attack one week later and promptly divorced her. “We were only
married one year when I was raped,” she recalled. “He said, ‘You should have
informed me because I don’t want you to be my wife after all these five
security men had their chance with you. I don’t want this kind of woman to be
my wife.’” She added that she thought many rape victims keep their ordeals to
themselves “because of things like what happened to me.”[90]



Several women told Human Rights Watch that they had heard stories of APD
personnel arresting women and then offering them a “choice” of submitting to
gang rape or going to prison. Several women said that for this reason, when
they were apprehended they immediately began insisting that the guards take
them directly to jail.[91]



One woman was cutting grass for a wealthy landowner’s pig near one of the
waste dumps in June 2009 when she saw APD personnel apprehend several female
illegal miners, drag them into nearby bushes, and begin raping them. Afraid
that she too would be raped, she fled across the dump, but ran into another
APD officer. “I asked them to just arrest me,” she said. “I lied to that man
and told him, ‘I have a small baby in the house so don’t rape me, it would not
be good.’ … [But] he asked me, ‘Do you want to go home or do you want to go to
jail?... If you want to go home, I’ll [have sex with] you.’” She responded
emphatically she wanted to go to jail, and was ultimately taken there without
being hurt. She spent six days in prison at Paiam, was released on K500 bail,
and was ultimately not convicted of an offense.[92]



Other women relayed similar experiences. One woman said APD personnel
apprehended her on one of the dumps in April 2010 and began walking her
towards an isolated area:



Another woman, in her fifties, was caught working on one of the waste dumps
around September 2009 and was put into an APD car with several APD personnel:



They did not say anything else, and took her to the PJV detention
facility.[94]



Some women found that there was no “choice” between going to jail or
submitting to rape. One woman described how she was raped after being caught
looking for ore-bearing rock at the Kogai waste dump around March 2008:



She did not report the crime. “I thought of going there to make a complaint,”
she said, “But I was afraid the police would say, ‘You deserved it because you
were going into that dump area.’”[95]



One young woman told Human Rights Watch that she was brutally gang raped by a
group of PJV security guards who caught her and three other women on the
mine’s Kogai waste dump in February 2009:[96]



 _They dragged us all into the bush. One of them said, “No talking, don’t
talk! Just remove your trousers.”_



 _One security [guard] had a bush knife [machete] and he hit me on the back
with the flat of it…I got mad and I bit him with my teeth on his shoulder.
Then he got mad and cut me with his knife [above the left elbow]. Then he
said, “Oh, you are tough lady,” and then he ripped off all my clothes and I
was completely naked._



 _After that, six security [personnel] raped me. One would pull my left leg,
one would pull my right leg wide, one would hold each of my hands and one
would rape me. Then they would change places._



 _The security that cut me with the knife raped two of the other girls and
used a condom. And then he came to me and opened my mouth wide and pushed his
penis with the condom into my mouth. After he released … he made me swallow
the condom. But the condom went only halfway down my throat and I pulled it
out._



 _I felt really sick and I tried to vomit and then I was unconscious. In the
evening my relatives came looking for me and found me lying there._



 _They security [had] said, “If you go and lay a complaint at the police
station we will lock you up in the jail—you ladies came to steal here so you
will go to jail and pay a very big fine.” I was scared to lay a complaint—I
did not know if they are doing this on the order of the company. Maybe if we
go there to complain they will just lock us up._



 _When people asked me how I was cut I said oh, I just accidentally cut myself
with my own knife. But my parents, I told them I had been raped. They could
not do anything, so I told them and we just left it like that._



 _I have lost a lot of weight—I wasn’t like this before, I used to be a fat
woman. Even when I see good food I think of the condom that was used on other
ladies pushed into my mouth and I do not feel good about eating._



 _I really got a bad name from that. [People who] saw me spread the news that
I was raped and was chewing condoms. That really made me feel low._



 _I can still remember the faces of those six security [officers]. If I see
them again I will cut them with a bush knife or an axe and I don’t care if I
go to prison. As long as I live I will think of this thing that happened to
me._



Human Rights Watch interviewed more than two dozen people detained by APD
personnel. Aside from the alleged rape victims, a large majority said their
captors treated them fairly and without abuse. But Human Rights Watch did hear
of several cases where APD personnel allegedly committed abuses against people
in their custody. As is the case with the gang rapes described above, almost
all these incidents occurred on or near the mine’s waste dumps, the areas
where APD personnel operate furthest from direct scrutiny by their superiors
within the force. People arrested by PJV security guards often spend the night
detained in a company-run detention facility inside the mine site before being
transferred to police custody in Paiam town. Almost all of the former
detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they did not suffer
abuse while in detention there, although a handful alleged that they had.



One young man told Human Rights Watch that he was looking for rocks on the
Anawe waste dump with his father when both were surprised by a group of PJV
security guards who fired tear gas at them without warning. “When I saw them I
tried to run away and they shot me with tear gas,” he said. “I fell down on
the hard rocks. My father also fell down on the rocks.” He said the guards
caught him and that six stood around him and his father, kicking the pair in
the ribs, stomach, and back with steel-toed boots as they lay helpless on the
ground. He was imprisoned and then released after paying a K1,500 ($570)
fine.[97]



A 15-year-old boy told Human Rights Watch that PJV security guards caught him
on the Anawe waste dump after he had walked across it to collect firewood. He
tried to run away but tripped. “I fell down and one of the security
[personnel] came and held me,” he said. “One just landed his fist on my face—I
stood up and he punched me in the face.” He said that the guards handcuffed
him and then—after he had already been cuffed—repeatedly threatened to let
their security dog attack him. “They were trying to let the dog bite me and I
was scared of the dog,” he said.[98] Yet another young man said that after
arresting him, APD personnel held him down and sprayed him repeatedly in the
face with a small aerosol canister full of pepper spray that burned his eyes
and face.[99]



A female illegal miner told Human Rights Watch that a PJV guard kicked her
repeatedly as she lay on the floor of a land cruiser after she had been
arrested. “It was a man who kicked me so it really hurt,” she said. She also
said that she was thrown to the ground and kicked by an APD security guard at
the mine detention site who asked her, “You people coming to this area, why do
you keep coming to this place?”[100] A woman arrested on the Anawe dump in
July 2009 said she was subjected to sexual harassment while in custody at the
mine site:



She said that the guards ultimately left her and the other women detained with
her unharmed. She was transferred into police custody the next morning.[101]



Human Rights Watch interviewed 21 people who said that they had been beaten,
shot at, or tear gassed by APD personnel in 2009 and 2010. As discussed above,
APD personnel often face violent situations that justify responding with
force.[102] But in some cases they appear to have used force in circumstances
that are not permitted by international principles that form the basis for
their own rules of engagement.



Barrick says that its policies on the use of force by APD personnel are
“aligned” with key sources of international standards: the Voluntary
Principles on Security and Human Rights, the UN Basic Principles on the Use of
Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials, and the UN Code of Conduct
for Law Enforcement Officials.[103]Generally speaking, accepted standards
allow for the use of force in a wide array of circumstances—including if
necessary to apprehend a criminal suspect—but require that law enforcement
officials “shall, as far as possible, apply non-violent means before resorting
to the use of force and firearms. They may use force and firearms only if
other means remain ineffective or without any promise of achieving the
intended result.”[104]



However, Human Rights Watch interviewed several illegal miners who described
being shot with drag-stabilized beanbag projectiles (which they described as
“rubber bullets”) or tear gas without warning or any real chance to
surrender.[105] A few said that PJV security guards had fired tear gas at them
while they were either fleeing or still scouring the dumps for rocks, not
having yet seen the guards.[106]



In February 2009 increasing levels of violent insecurity around Porgera led
the government to deploy four police mobile squads to the area.[107] This move
came with a significant catch, the government was unwilling to bear the costs
of the operation, so Barrick agreed to assume most of the responsibility for
supporting the mobile squads while they were in Porgera, including by housing
and feeding them on PJV property.[108] The deployment remained in place as of
September 2010, though it had been reduced to two squads, or about 70 men.



The close relationship between PJV and the mobile police deployment was a
cause of concern from the outset, police mobile squads have a long history of
violence and abuse directed at ordinary citizens.[109] Then, in April 2009,
the mobile squads attacked and burned a village adjacent to the mine called
Wuangima and destroyed homes in another village called Kulapi as well. In
February 2010, Amnesty International published a report documenting the
widespread violent abuses involved in these operations and condemned them as
illegal forced evictions. Amnesty called for an independent inquiry into the
abuses, appropriate remedies for the victims, and prosecution of those
responsible.[110]When Human Rights Watch visited Porgera in May 2010, Wuangima
was a deserted hillside littered with trash and the foundations of ruined
homes.



Barrick initially maintained that Wuangima was not a permanent community at
all but merely a collection of 35 “crude structures” inhabited primarily by
transient criminals and illegal miners.[111] In fact, while Wuangima was often
used as a staging point for raids on the open pit by illegal miners, the
community had many longtime residents and permanent structures including a
church.[112] The company also made the astonishing assertion that, “There is
no evidence that the PNG police who carried out the actions in question used
excessive or disproportionate force, or, indeed, that they used _any_ force,”
even though PJV employees in Porgera told Human Rights Watch they watched
Wuangima burn from inside the mine site.[113]Barrick has since partially
backed away from its initial, untenable position and acknowledged that homes
were destroyed.[114]The company still maintains that none of its personnel
knew about any police plan to destroy Wuangima until they saw smoke rising
from the burning houses.[115]



Barrick has engaged Ila Geno, a respected former commissioner of police and
ombudsman, to make occasional trips to Porgera to monitor the conduct of the
mobile squads there. His reports to Barrick are not public. While Geno’s
engagement is a positive step, there is still need for an independent
investigation into the forced evictions of 2009. Geno’s mandate does not
include such an investigation.[116]



A mobile squad section commander interviewed by Human Rights Watch in May 2010
claimed that the conduct of the deployment had improved since the 2009 forced
evictions. “We are trying to work with people so the people know we are here
to help them and not to chase them or harass them,” he said. “We no longer
bash [beat] people around like that.”[117] But abuses did not halt altogether.
In July 2010 a group of mobile police allegedly kidnapped three teenage girls
whom they kept overnight at their quarters on the mine site and raped. Police
officials in Port Moresby took the unusual step of investigating the incident
and suspended three officers it identified as responsible. Barrick officials
told Human Rights Watch that they had urged police officials to take the
incident seriously and believed the perpetrators would be prosecuted.[118]



One fundamental question looms large in light of these abuses: should the
mobile deployment in Porgera continue, and if so, under what terms? Amnesty
International has called for Barrick to withdraw accommodation and other
support to the mobile deployment in light of the 2009 forced evictions and the
impunity enjoyed by those responsible.[119]



Human Rights Watch agrees that in principle the forces should not be housed
and fed on the mine site, this creates the appearance of company control over
the police, as well as the possibility that inappropriate collusion could
occur. But it is also true that the mobile deployment would probably end if
Barrick stopped providing that support; the government has consistently
refused to commit the resources necessary to maintain law and order around
Porgera.



The mobile deployment has by all accounts greatly reduced violence and crime
around Porgera. Almost all local residents and officials interviewed by Human
Rights Watch said they wanted the mobile deployment to continue in Porgera.
The ranking police officer at Paiam police station said that in the months
prior to the deployment, Porgera resembled “some kind of Wild West area where
nobody cared for anybody.” He said the police were confronted with 10-15 rape
cases and 5-6 murders every month, along with numerous armed robberies and
tribal fights. “I know for sure this lawlessness will come again after this
police operation is withdrawn,” he asserted.[120] The head doctor at the
hospital in Paiam town told Human Rights Watch that on a typical day in the
months before the mobile deployment began, the hospital would treat three to
four serious injuries resulting from highway robberies, tribal fighting, or
domestic violence, and that such injuries were far less common since the
deployment began.[121]



Human Rights Watch urges Barrick to do more to keep the mobile deployment at
arm’s length from company operations, including by pressing the PNG government
to provide room and board for the deployment off company premises. But we also
recognize the need to balance this goal against the importance of avoiding a
return to the dismal situation that prevailed before the deployment.



Barrick officials told Human Rights Watch they believe that the only viable
long-term solution to the chronic insecurity and violence around Porgera is
for the government to bolster the capacity of the area’s regular police
presence and justice sector institutions. In partnership with the national and
provincial governments, the company has launched an initiative that aims to
increase the number of police deployed to Porgera from 16 to 66 and improve
the quality of the infrastructure the force and the local courts rely on.
Barrick has agreed to build or pay for much of the necessary infrastructure,
including a new police barracks that should be completed in September 2011,
but the government will have to follow through on promises to supply the
personnel.[122]As Barrick’s vice-president for security and crisis management
put it, “Problem one is getting a permanent police presence of the right
nature. Problem two is influencing that police presence to operate in an
appropriate way.”[123]





Although governments have primary responsibility for promoting and ensuring
respect for human rights, corporations also have a number of responsibilities,
as increasingly recognized by international law and other norms. These norms
reflect an expectation that corporations should have policies and procedures
in place that ensure human rights abuses do not occur and that they undertake
adequate due diligence to identify and effectively mitigate human rights
problems.[124]



This approach has been elaborated by John Ruggie, the United Nations special
representative of the secretary general on the issue of human rights and
transnational corporations and other business enterprises. Ruggie has
developed a framework known as the “protect, respect and remedy” approach to
business-related human rights issues that in part outlines the basic steps
that companies should take to respect human rights, avoid complicity in
abuses, and adequately remedy them if they occur.



Barrick is a member of the UN Global Compact, a voluntary initiative which
incorporates human rights commitments. Under the compact companies pledge
their adherence to ten “universally accepted principles in the areas of human
rights, labour, environment and anti-corruption” that derive from the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other texts.[125]One of the 10
principles is that companies should “make sure that they are not complicit in
human rights abuses.”[126]



Of most direct relevance to the abuses discussed above, Barrick has formally
subscribed to the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights (Voluntary
Principles). The Voluntary Principles are a framework that brings together a
range of multinational extractive companies, home governments, and civil
society organizations around a set of principles on the relationship between
extractive companies and the public or private security forces they rely on
for protection. They focus on how companies should seek to prevent human
rights abuses by those security forces as well as on how companies should
respond when abuses do occur.[127] While the company only joined the Voluntary
Principles in October 2010, the company accepted them as “a basis for the
operation of all of Barrick’s mines … incorporated into a number of different
company policies” even before it formally joined the process.[128]



Of particular relevance in the context of Porgera, the Voluntary Principles
ask companies, inter alia, to:



As described below, Barrick has taken steps to implement the Voluntary
Principles since acquiring the Porgera mine in 2006. However, those steps fell
short in a number of key respects, and failed to prevent or deter the abuses
described above. More recent steps—many of them taken since mid-2010 in direct
response to Human Rights Watch’s allegations—could do much to remedy these
deficiencies if implemented in good faith.



Local and international activists have criticized Barrick over alleged human
rights abuses and environmental damage at operations around the world. In
fact, one small group of international activists—ProtestBarrick.net—has led a
permanent campaign specifically aimed at calling attention to alleged human
rights abuses and environmental destruction at Barrick’s worldwide operations,
including at Porgera.[130] This has contributed to a siege mentality among
some Barrick officials.



Some allegations leveled by critics of Barrick have been exaggerated or
incorrect.[131] But too often in the past, Barrick has responded to legitimate
human rights and environmental criticisms of the Porgera mine with a “shoot
the messenger” approach, attacking the company’s critics while failing to
address important substantive concerns.



To cite two recent examples:



More recently Barrick has shown signs of a tangible shift toward more serious
engagement with human rights concerns. One senior company official told Human
Rights Watch that “Our approach has changed. We want to be more open. There
are a lot of good things this company does … but we need to be more open to
talking about the bad things as well.”[135]



Over the course of several months beginning in May 2010, Barrick has engaged
in a frank and substantive dialogue with Human Rights Watch about all of our
concerns regarding the Porgera mine. The company has also taken or promised to
take several meaningful steps to address the most serious human rights abuses
described in this report. The following pages describe those steps, as does
the letter from Barrick that is published as an annex to the report.[136]



Human Rights Watch welcomes Barrick’s commitments to act, but it was not yet
possible at the time of writing to determine whether they would be implemented
effectively and in good faith. And even highly effective efforts to prevent
and respond to abuse in the future cannot obviate the need to ensure
accountability for abuses that have already occurred.



Since taking over PJV in 2006, Barrick has taken a number of steps to
incorporate the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights into the
operations of the APD force at Porgera. The company has funded external
assessments of some of its operations, including Porgera, to determine what
needs to be done in order to align the operation with the Voluntary
Principles. It has also produced a “Voluntary Principles Standard” that
“defines the company’s interpretation and detailed requirements for
implementation of the [Voluntary Principles], including responsibilities and
accountabilities.” Barrick also says that it “seeks to have the Voluntary
Principles recognized in any relevant dealings and agreements with Government
agencies.”[137] More specifically, the company says that it:



While the measures described above are positive, PJV’s efforts have fallen
short of what is required by the Voluntary Principles, and have failed to
prevent violent abuses by APD personnel or ensure accountability for abuses
that do occur. In April 2010, Barrick’s country director for Papua New Guinea
responded to a question about alleged abuses by APD personnel by saying:



Such statements hardly accord with the company’s policy of taking all alleged
abuses seriously. In general, though, the problem has lain not in the
company’s response to allegations of abuse by APD personnel but in its failure
to detect abuses in the first place through internal channels, coupled with a
tendency to regard external sources of allegations as not credible. In Human
Rights Watch’s view, the company’s efforts have fallen woefully short in two
key respects:



In the past Barrick has blithely stated that if incidents of sexual violence
involving APD personnel did occur, either the victims or international
organizations compiling their accounts should refer the matter to the police.
This was not only a deplorable abdication of responsibility on the part of the
company, but also unrealistic. The police enjoy little public confidence to
begin with due to their reputation for violent abuse and incompetence, and
many victims fear retaliation since they suffered abuse after being arrested
for criminal activity. As discussed in detail above, this is a fear that some
abusive APD personnel have effectively played upon to dissuade their victims
from reporting abuses to the police.



These are crucial—and inexcusable—omissions. But Barrick does appear to have
acknowledged these failures and to be taking serious measures to address them.
As the company itself put it, “The fact that these incidents may have
occurred, that the PJV’s inquiries failed to reveal them, and that women did
not raise these incidents with the PJV but openly spoke of them with Human
Rights Watch, tells us in clear and unmistakable terms that we have not met
the standards and expectations we set for ourselves in this regard.”[153]



Human Rights Watch provided Barrick officials in Porgera and Port Moresby with
a general overview of the allegations and concerns described in this report in
May 2010. We also attended an eight-hour meeting with senior Barrick officials
in September 2010 to discuss these issues. In June 2010, at Barrick’s request,
we provided a more detailed written summary of the incidents of sexual
violence described in this report. As described above, Barrick responded to
that information by retaining Ila Geno, a respected former commissioner of
police and ombudsman, to look into the allegations.[154]After initial
inquiries in communities around Porgera, Geno recommended the police launch a
criminal investigation, which they ultimately did.[155] Geno told Human Rights
Watch: “I came to a point where there was cause for concern and I advised the
commissioner of police very strongly that there should be a police
investigation.”[156] Barrick officials agreed to provide logistical and other
support to a team of police investigators who then traveled from the capital
to carry out the investigation. The company also says that it proactively
urged the police to dispatch experienced senior investigators and to ensure
that the investigating team included a female officer.[157] In addition,
Barrick says that the company’s own internal investigation into the
allegations saw a team of 15 investigators carry out more than 650 interviews
with company employees over the course of several months.[158] “This is being
approached in the way that you would approach a major, systematic criminal
event,” said Barrick’s vice-president for security and crisis management.[159]



By November 2010, senior company officials appeared to have reached the point
of accepting that there was a pattern of sexual abuse by some APD
personnel.[160]The inquiries by Barrick and the police uncovered at least 13
“potential crimes” by APD personnel, apparently separate from the cases
investigated by Human Rights Watch.[161] “We’ve got some bad eggs and we’re
going to get rid of them,” Mac Grace, Barrick’s Papua New Guinea security
manager, told Human Rights Watch, adding that “processes were in place but
some of those processes weren’t working.”[162]



In January 2011 Barrick fired six employees who PJV mine manager Mark Fischer
said were “credibly implicated in criminal activity, are alleged to have
misled investigators, or were aware of these alleged crimes and did not come
forward.”[163] The company provided records of 30 of those interviews to
police investigators.[164] The police subsequently arrested three current and
former Barrick employees, charging two of them with rape.[165] At the time,
the police stated that additional arrests were likely to follow.[166]



Human Rights Watch welcomes the above steps, but emphasizes that
investigations should focus on unearthing broader patterns of abuse, as well
as ensuring accountability for the incidents described in this report.



Barrick has taken several measures that could make it easier for community
members to complain about alleged abuses. These are laid out in detail in the
annex to this report. Key measures include the following:



Barrick says that a project has been underway since early 2009 to “improve
security infrastructure and oversight at PJV.”[174] In December 2010 the
company acknowledged that “The results of the internal investigation have made
clear to us that further changes to the security function at Porgera must be
undertaken.”[175] Barrick has committed itself to several new measures that
should strengthen its ability to prevent, monitor, and respond to abuses by
APD personnel at Porgera if implemented effectively and in good faith. Those
commitments are spelled out in detail in the letter attached as an annex to
this report. Key points include the following:



Barrick also states that it is pursuing “other substantial internal changes
outside of security.” These include appointing an independent Director to its
Board of Directors with expertise in Corporate Social Responsibility and
enhancing company human rights compliance programs.[190]



Human Rights Watch welcomes these measures, but at time of writing many had
not yet been implemented so their effectiveness was impossible to gauge.
Ultimately their value will depend entirely on whether they succeed in
preventing serious abuses and in bringing abuses to the company’s attention if
they do occur.



A ton of ore-bearing rock yields only a tiny amount of gold. The remaining
material is processed into tailings, a waste product made up mostly of rock,
heavy metals, and trace elements of chemicals like cyanide that are used to
extract the gold. PJV produces roughly six million tons of liquid tailings
every year; in 2008 the mine generated almost 9.5 tons of tailings for every
ounce of gold produced.[191]



PJV discharges its iron-rich tailings into the nearby Porgera River, staining
its upper reaches a rusty red color. The Porgera River’s water ultimately
flows into the Strickland River system, one of Papua New Guinea’s longest and
most important. Many locals refer to the tailings, and to stretches of the
Porgera River itself, as “the red water” and regard it with considerable fear
and apprehension.[192]



The long-term environmental and health impacts of PJV’s riverine tailings
disposal have been hotly debated for many years.[193] Critics fear that the
build-up of heavy metals downstream could have unpredictable and potentially
dangerous consequences for the environment and human health. Before the mine
even opened, PJV’s plans to employ riverine tailings disposal were publicly
rejected by Papua New Guinea’s minister of environment and conservation as
“totally unacceptable.”[194] But the Papua New Guinea government ultimately
approved the plan in spite of those objections.



Barrick maintains that, due partly to unique characteristics of the Porgera
River and its surrounding environment, there is no reason to believe the
practice of riverine tailings disposal at Porgera has or will have any serious
negative health or environmental impacts downstream from the mine.[195] “Is
there an environmental impact? Sure, you’re not going to hear us say there
isn’t,” acknowledged Bill Williams, Barrick’s vice-president for the
environment. “But it’s manageable and it appears to be reversible.”[196]



Critics vehemently disagree, arguing that PJV’s tailings send potentially
harmful heavy metals flowing downstream in quantities that far exceed anything
that would be permissible under the water quality standards of developed
countries, and that the long-term negative effects of riverine tailings
disposal in any given context are difficult and perhaps impossible to
accurately predict.[197] The Norwegian government’s pension fund excluded
Barrick from its investment portfolio in March 2009 on the recommendation of
its Council on Ethics, which found that PJV’s practice of riverine tailings
disposal carried unacceptable risks of harm to human health and “long-term and
irreversible environmental damage.”[198]



The weight of industry good practice is firmly and clearly against the
practice of riverine tailings disposal.[199] In fact, Porgera is one of only
three large mines in the world run by international companies that still
dispose their tailings into river systems; all three are on the island of
Papua.[200]



In July 2010, more than a dozen people went to the hospital in Paiam town
suffering from chemical burns. According to the hospital’s chief doctor, they
said they had been panning for gold in the mine’s tailing discharge and had
been burned by it.[201] Barrick later said it was investigating whether the
tailings had not been diluted properly over the course of several days owing
to a lack of adequate water during a dry spell.[202]



Papua New Guinea has a painful history with riverine tailings disposal gone
awry. The country’s enormous Ok Tedi copper mine also employs the practice. In
1999 that project sparked an international scandal when data revealed that
tailings had overflowed river banks downstream, destroying gardens and killing
large swathes of vegetation. BHP Billiton, the company that owned and operated
the mine at the time, pulled out in 1999. Then-Managing Director and Chief
Executive Paul Anderson publicly stated that the mine was “not compatible with
our environmental values and the company should never have become
involved.”[203] BHP Billiton has since publicly committed not to become
involved in any project that employs riverine tailings disposal.[204]



PJV has also drawn fire for the way it measures compliance with water quality
standards. The company asserts that levels of dissolved metals downstream from
the mine are consistently within the range that Papua New Guinean law
prescribes.[205] But the company measures this at a “compliance point” that is
165 kilometers downstream from the mine. By this point the mine’s tailings
have been considerably diluted; more than two-thirds of the river’s flow at
the compliance point comes from sources untouched by PJV’s operations.[206]



Barrick maintains that the 165 km between the tailings discharge point and the
compliance point constitute a “mixing zone,” a defined area around an effluent
discharge point where water quality standards do not apply. Mixing zones are
standard practice in the mining industry but they generally constitute much
smaller areas, sometimes measured in square meters rather than kilometers. The
Norwegian government Council on Ethics, recommending that the pension fund
divest itself of Barrick stock due to the risk of severe environmental harm at
Porgera, stated that, “In the council’s opinion, Porgera’s mixing zone does
not constitute a mixing zone in the internationally accepted sense of the
term.”[207]



Barrick defends the size of its mixing zone as legitimate and says that the
Papua New Guinea government set the compliance point, not PJV. At the same
time, the company acknowledges that the current mixing zone is a “large area”
and says that it may relocate the compliance point further upstream, but only
if it is certain the mine will remain within acceptable water quality
standards if it does so.[208]



This report does not seek to evaluate the likely impact of PJV’s riverine
tailings disposal on human health or the environment. But concerns about the
practice are certainly legitimate, and Barrick has displayed a troubling lack
of transparency in addressing those concerns that it should immediately
remedy. Recently, the company has expressed some willingness to do just that,
agreeing to make public its environmental reports to the government. If
honored, this commitment will make it more feasible for independent experts to
evaluate the likely health and environmental impacts of tailings disposal at
Porgera.



In recommending that Norway’s pension fund divest itself of all Barrick stock,
the fund’s Council of Ethics cited among other things a “lack of openness and
transparency in the company’s environmental reporting.”[209] In Human Rights
Watch’s view, that criticism was directly on the mark.



Until September 2010, Barrick consistently refused to make public key data
that could allow for independent assessment of its claims regarding the likely
impacts of riverine tailings disposal at Porgera especially its periodic
environmental reports to the Papua New Guinea government. Alternative
independent sources of data do not exist.



PJV has facilitated the production of a “Strickland River Report Card” by the
Porgera Environmental Advisory Komiti (PEAK), a nominally independent body,
entirely funded by Barrick, mandated to monitor the environmental impact of
PJV’s operations. The report card contains basic data about overall levels of
heavy metals at various points along the river. This is a first step in the
direction of greater transparency—the first and so far only report card was
produced in 2009—but it is only a brochure, with color-coded graphics
distilled from the hard data in the company’s environmental reports.[210]



Barrick monitors potential health and environmental impacts downstream from
the mine. The company has commissioned a Health Risk Assessment by an outside
consultant that should be completed in early 2011, which it has agreed to make
available to Human Rights Watch. It is also undertaking a new study of mercury
levels downstream from the mine, which should be completed in late 2012 or
early 2013.[211]



In September 2010, Barrick agreed to provide Human Rights Watch with a copy of
PJV’s 2009 environmental report once it has undergone peer review, and to
provide a copy of the 2010 report when it is completed as well.[212] At the
time of publication the company said that neither document had yet been
finalized. Company officials also said that they were in the early stages of
developing an initiative to regularly publish a broad range of environmental
data relating to all of Barrick’s operations, probably on the internet.[213]
Human Rights Watch welcomes all of these commitments as important steps in the
direction of meaningful transparency around the Porgera mine’s possible
environmental and health impacts.



Barrick has also not been transparent about its basis for another key
assertion, its claim that in the case of the Porgera mine there is no viable
alternative to riverine tailings disposal. PJV has long argued that tailings
dams (permanent structures that store and isolate mine tailings) are too
dangerous to use around Porgera because of high seismicity, frequent
landslides, illegal miners, and other factors.[214] It is true that safe
construction and maintenance of on-land tailings retention facilities in Papua
New Guinea is both technically daunting and expensive.[215] But it is not
clear whether it is true that no safer methods of riverine tailings disposal
are feasible at Porgera.



Barrick commissioned a US$5 million study in 2006 to examine potential
alternatives to riverine tailings discharge—including construction of a large
tailings storage facility—and says that the study’s findings indicated that
“[Tailings storage facility] engineering had not advanced sufficiently since
the mine was originally permitted to address these significant risk factors
and that the operation should not be reconfigured.”[216] But Barrick has
refused to make the study itself public; Human Rights Watch urges it to do so
in order to make independent evaluation of its claims possible.[217] The
company asserts that cost has not been “the principal factor in determining
tailings options at Porgera,” but it is not clear exactly what that means, or
how much of a factor cost actually constituted.[218]



Small-scale and illegal miners around Porgera routinely employ an extremely
dangerous method of extracting gold from ore-bearing rock using mercury. This
exposes them, their families, and the communities around them to a very high
risk of mercury poisoning.[219]



The method small-scale miners around Porgera usually employ to process ore-
bearing rock is to crush it into a dust, wash as many undesirable rock
particles out of the dust as possible, and then pour mercury into the
remaining material. The mercury binds to any gold present in that material,
creating a gold-mercury amalgam that excludes everything else. Miners then
cook this amalgam over an open flame, causing the mercury to turn into vapor
and escape into the air.[220] The miners are left with pure gold, which they
can sell on the open market.



This is an extremely dangerous practice that can damage the brain, central
nervous system, kidneys, and lungs, as well as lead to psychiatric problems
including wild mood swings and loss of memory and concentration.[221] Unborn
fetuses and children can suffer developmental problems if exposed to
mercury.[222] The chief doctor at Paiam hospital said that although his
institution lacks the equipment necessary to test for mercury poisoning, they
regularly diagnosed cases of mercury poisoning from the severe symptoms of
many illegal miners. He said that many patients resembled “zombies” by the
time they reached the hospital and added that, “some will recover, some will
not.”[223]



Making matters worse, around Porgera this dangerous method of separating
mercury from gold is often carried out inside people’s homes, in some cases
using the same utensils families use to prepare food. Human Rights Watch’s
researcher observed this taking place in several communities all around
Porgera.



The widespread use of these dangerous practices is primarily due to two
factors. First, there is widespread ignorance regarding the dire health
consequences of current methods of mercury use and the availability of safer
alternatives. Many illegal miners interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they
had heard that mercury could be dangerous but believed they had been working
with the substance for so long they were no immune to any negative effect it
might normally have. Most interviewees were not aware of safer methods of
cooking their amalgam, such as using simple retorts that trap mercury vapor
and condense it back into liquid so that it is not inhaled, or else declined
to use such methods because they believed that they yielded less gold.[224]



A second problem is that many people are loath to work with gold outside their
homes because they do not want their neighbors to know how much they have.
Having broken the law to obtain gold-bearing rock from PJV property in the
first place, many illegal miners also do not want police or APD personnel to
see them working with gold.[225]



Shops in Porgera station sell vials of mercury openly. It is not clear that
banning the sale of mercury is feasible given the overall lack of law and
order in the area, and in any case, many local people depend on small-scale
mining to feed their families. But even if Porgera’s mercury problem has no
easy or straightforward solution, clear first steps must be taken as a matter
of urgency:



Canada is arguably the mining industry’s most important global hub. The
country is a leading producer of several key minerals and home to many of the
world’s largest multinational mining companies.[227] But no Canadian law
provides a mechanism to allow Canadian authorities to exercise meaningful
scrutiny and oversight of the human rights impact and compliance of Canadian
extractive companies operating overseas. On these issues, Canadian companies
operating overseas generally only have to comply with the laws and regulations
of the countries in which they work. This often means the bar is set far too
low.



Since gaining independence in 1975, Papua New Guinea has struggled—and largely
failed—to build functional institutions of governance. The government is
continually mired in allegations of corruption and mismanagement, while key
public institutions such as the police have grown consistently more
dysfunctional and abusive over time.[228]



The Papua New Guinean government also has a long track record of failing to
adequately regulate the operations of foreign extractives companies, whose
operations dominate the national economy. For instance in the timber industry
political power and corruption have long combined to ensure the country’s
environmental laws are ignored and rural communities are exposed to
abuse.[229] Rather than address legitimate concerns around these issues, the
government has increasingly focused on quashing objections that might stand in
the way of new extractive projects.



In March 2010 people living near the Chinese-owned Ramu nickel mine filed a
lawsuit challenging the legality of the project’s plans to construct a
pipeline that would deposit mine tailings in the ocean.The plaintiffs won a
temporary injunction halting construction of the pipeline.[230]Parliament
responded by passing amendments to the country’s Environment Act that would
strip citizens of their right to challenge the legality of large, government-
sanctioned extractives projects in court.[231] The move triggered widespread
public outrage and as of September 2010 the changes had not yet been signed
into law.



The PNG government’s failure to establish any coherent mechanisms of oversight
for private security forces like the APD force in Porgera is emblematic of its
broader shortcomings. To the extent that there is any government oversight of
the APD force, it rests with police officials in the faraway capital of Port
Moresby. In practice this means that there is no meaningful, regular
government oversight of the APD force at all.



The police station commander in Paiam town has no oversight role over the
force. Asked whether his officers could investigate allegations of abuse or
criminality by APD personnel, he replied, “They would not allow us permission
to enter the premises…. The company paid for it. They have the right to
protect their property. I will never enter the company premises without their
permission.”[232]



Ila Geno, the respected former commissioner of police and ombudsman whom
Barrick retained to monitor the conduct of mobile police squads deployed
around Porgera, told Human Rights Watch that in his view the theoretical
oversight of the APD force by police officials in the capital was
“impracticable and very loose.” He advocated that the police give the station
commander in Paiam town more responsibility for oversight of the APD force,
but he also said that such a move would be useless or worse unless the token
police presence in Paiam was bolstered with the capacity it would need to do
the job correctly.[233] Barrick officials told Human Rights Watch that the PNG
government is working on legislation that would install mechanisms to oversee
private security forces in the country, and that the company views that effort
as positive.[234]



The lack of meaningful government regulation and oversight in countries like
PNG creates a void that could be filled by sensible regulation by
multinational companies’ home governments. Canada’s parliament recently
considered and disappointingly rejected a bill that could have been a good
first step in that direction.



Human Rights Watch believes that mandatory rules by companies’ home
governments obliging them to respect human rights are an essential safeguard
that most governments have yet to implement. Although voluntary initiatives
like the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights are supported by
governments and some key industry players, they are not mandatory rules and
compliance with them is limited.



In Canada, an opportunity for progress was lost in October 2010 when the House
of Commons narrowly rejected a modest bill called C-300 that would have
obliged the Canadian government to monitor whether Canadian oil, mining, and
gas companies complied with basic human rights and environmental standards in
their overseas operations.[235] While the bill included no criminal penalties,
companies that refused to comply with its guidelines would have faced public
government investigations and the loss of some limited forms of government
financing and consular support.[236]



Many companies, including Barrick, claim they already adhere to many of the
standards incorporated into C-300. But the mining industry lobbied heavily
against the bill, and Barrick vocally opposed its passage.[237] Some industry
representatives indulged in fanciful scare tactics about the bill’s supposed
potential to eviscerate the country’s mining industry.[238]Conservative
members of parliament opposed the bill, and C-300’s prospects also suffered
because of the ambiguous position taken by Liberal MP Michael Ignatieff, who
leads the opposition.[239]



Canadian oil, mining, and gas companies should have welcomed C-300 rather than
treat it as a potential catastrophe. By setting clear standards based on
international norms that many Canadian companies already claim to respect, the
bill could have saved companies the laborious and complicated task of
developing those rules on their own.



Canada’s government must now go back to the drawing board. In theory, a
consensus already exists as to what the Canadian policy on these issues ought
to look like. A 2007 roundtable process that included representatives of both
industry and civil society arrived at a series of recommendations about the
way forward. Those recommendations should all be adopted. The roundtable
participants recommended, among other things, the creation of an independent
ombudsman office to examine complaints against Canadian companies and
sanctions for non-compliant companies similar to those set down in C-300.[240]



In human rights terms, the recommendations of the roundtable advisory group
are modest, but they represent a good place to start. Unfortunately though,
the “consensus” that appeared to have emerged from the roundtable process may
be an illusion. The government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper has done
little to implement the roundtable recommendations, and in particular, has not
created the ombudsman position. Instead, the government created a corporate
social responsibility counselor that has been widely criticized as
ineffectual. Moreover, the fact that industry representatives treated
provisions of C-300 that were largely based on the roundtable report as
anathema has reinforced many analysts’ fears that the industry now intends to
undermine the consensus it helped forge.



The only way to clarify this murky picture is for both of Canada’s major
political parties to spell out in detail where they stand on implementing the
roundtable recommendations, and what they think a government-led framework to
oversee the human rights records of oil, mining, and gas companies should look
like. As of late 2010, neither the Liberal nor the Conservative party had done
this.



This report was researched and authored by Chris Albin-Lackey, senior
researcher in the Business and Human Rights Division. It was reviewed and
edited by Arvind Ganesan, business and human rights director; Phil Robertson,
Asia Division deputy director; Joseph Amon, health and human rights director;
Zama Coursen-Neff, deputy director of the Children’s Rights Division; Nisha
Varia, senior researcher in the Women’s Rights Division; Aisling Reidy, senior
legal adviser; and Danielle Haas, program editor. Additional editorial and
production assistance was provided by Kristina DeMain, business and human
rights coordinator. The report was prepared for publication by Grace Choi,
publications director; Veronica Matushaj, creative director; Anna Lopriore,
creative manager; Jose Martinez, production coordinator; and Fitzroy Hepkins,
mail manager. Human Rights Watch thanks all of the organizations and
individuals interviewed in Papua New Guinea for this report for their
invaluable assistance and insight.

















![](/sites/default/files/styles/embed_xxl/public/media/images/photographs/tmp_2txQxM?itok=edmvZHbH)

Click to expand Image





[1]In 2009 Papua New Guinea was ranked 148 out of 182 countries on the United
Nations Development Program’s Human Development Index, one rank above Haiti.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), “Human Development Report 2009,”
2009,http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_PNG.html
(accessed August 19, 2010).



[2]Satish Chand, “PNG economic survey: some weak signs of recovery,” December
13, 2003, http://dspace.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/40141/3/chand2003.pdf
(accessed September 7, 2010), p. 7.



[3] See PNG LNG, “Economic Impacts,”
http://www.pnglng.com/media/pdfs/publications/PNG_LNG_Economic_Impacts_8.pdf
(accessed August 18, 2010). Concerns that disputes over landowner compensation
could submerge the project in violence have already come to fruition, however.
See, for example, “ExxonMobil’s LNG project in PNG attacked,” Reuters,
September 28, 2010, http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSN2818464920100928
(accessed October 5, 2010).



[4] See, for example, Glenn Banks, “Understanding ‘resource’ conflicts in
Papua New Guinea,” _Asia Pacific Viewpoint,_ Vol. 49, No. 1, April 2008, pp.
23-34. Most notably, unrest rooted around the massive Panguna gold and copper
mine on Bougainville Island led Papua New Guinea into a secessionist civil
war. See Anthony Regan, _Light Intervention: Lessons from Bougainville_
(Washington: USIP Press, 2010). See below, text box 6: The Ok Tedi Disaster;
The Need for Canadian Government Regulation.



[5] See below, The Ok Tedi Disaster.



[6] In 2009 Barrick held interests in 26 operating mines, produced 7.4 million
ounces of gold and ended the year with reserves of 139.8 million ounces. See
http://www.barrick.com/Company/Profile/default.aspx.



[7] Placer Dome owned a 75 percent share in PJV when Barrick bought the
company. In 2007 Barrick bought the 20 percent share that was held by Emperor
Gold, leaving it with the 95 percent stake it owns today.



[8] See below, A Legacy of Abuse.



[9] Richard Thomas Jackson and Glenn Banks, _In Search of the Serpent’s Skin:
The Story of the Porgera Gold Project_ (Port Moresby: Placer Niugini, 2002),
pp. 8-52; Susanne Bonnell, “Social Change in the Porgera Valley,” in Colin
Filer, ed., _Dilemmas of Development: the social and economic impact of the
Porgera gold mine, 1989-1994_ (Canberra: Asia Pacific Press, 1999), pp. 19-87.



[10] PJV pays two percent of its total sales as royalties, divided as follows:
50 percent to the Enga Provincial Government, five percent to the autonomous
Porgera Development Association, 15 percent in direct distributions to Special
Mining Lease area landowners, 10 percent to a Children’s Trust, 12 percent to
the Porgera Landowners Association and eight percent in distributions to young
adults in landowning families. Human Rights Watch interviews with Ila Temu and
Anthony Smare, senior Barrik officials, Barrick Papua New Guinea, Port
Moresby, April 30, 2010 and with Morop Tero, Mining Coordinator, Mineral
Resources Authority, Porgera Station, May 12, 2010.



[11] Susanne Bonnell, “The Landowner Relocation Programme,” in Filer, ed.,
_Dilemmas of Development,_ p. 130.



[12] See Glenn Banks, “Globalization, poverty and hyperdevelopment in Papua
New Guinea’s mining sector,” _Focaal—European Journal of Anthropology,_ No. 46
(2005), pp. 128-43; See also Bonnell, “Social Change in the Porgera Valley,”
and Glenn Banks, “The Economic Impact of the Mine,” in Filer, ed., _Dilemmas
of Development,_ pp. 19-128.



[13] According to PJV, the mine produced 16,348,642 ounces of gold between
1990 and 2009, with an actual shipment value of 14.6 billion kina (US$5.5
billion). Porgera Joint Venture, “Information Booklet,” 2009, p. 3. As of
September 2010 the price of gold stood at just over $1,250 per ounce.



[14] In 1992 the mine produced almost 1.5 million ounces of gold. Porgera
Joint Venture, “Information Booklet,” 2009, p. 3.



[15] PJV estimates that the mine accounted for 11.7 percent of Papua New
Guinea’s total exports between 1990 and 2009. Porgera Joint Venture,
“Information Booklet,” 2009, p. 3.



[16] The mine’s actual closing date will depend on market and other factors.
Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September
9, 2010.



[17] Development of the open pit was accounted for in the mine’s 1988
Environmental Plan. See Porgera Joint Venture, “Porgera Gold Project
Environmental Plan,” Volume B, January 1988, p. 11.



[18] See below, Riverine Tailings Disposal at Porgera.



[19] See International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED),
“Mining for the Future, Appendix I: Porgera Riverine Disposal Case Study,”
April 2002,
http://www.mining.ubc.ca/mlc/presentations_pub/Pub_LVW/68b_mftf-i.pdf
(accessed August 18, 2010), p. 8.



[20] The Porgera mine was originally conceived as a much smaller and shorter-
lived project than it ultimately turned out to be. See Jackson and Banks, _In
Search of the Serpent’s Skin,_ pp. 1-7, 169-228. In 1988 an Environmental Plan
for the mine was drawn up based on contemporary estimates that the operation
would produce some 8.57 million ounces of gold (roughly half of what the mine
has actually produced to date) and cease operations in 2010 (the mine is
currently projected to close around 2023). See Porgera Joint Venture, “Porgera
Gold Project Environmental Plan,” Volume B, January 1988.



[21] One 2007 survey found noted that 95.7 percent of all interviewed
landowners favored resettlement. URS Australia, “Porgera Joint Venture SML
Resettlement: Strategic Resettlement Action Plan,” March 2007, unpublished
draft, p. 3.



[22] Human Rights Watch interview #23, Porgera Station, May 7, 2010.



[23] Human Rights Watch interviews with senior Barrick officials, Porgera mine
site, May 10, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony Smare, Sybil
Veenman, Mark Wall, Peter Sinclair, Tim Omundsen and Bill Williams, senior
Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[24] URS Australia, “Porgera Joint Venture SML Resettlement: Strategic
Resettlement Action Plan,” March 2007, unpublished draft, p. 2.



[25] Letter from Anthony Smare, general manager—Corporate and Legal, Barrick
Papua New Guinea, to Human Rights Watch, September 7, 2010.



[26] Human Rights Watch interviews with Barrick officials, Porgera, May 10,
2010; Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
October 9, 2010.



[27] Human Rights Watch interview with former PJV employee, mid-2010 (name and
location withheld by Human Rights Watch); Human Rights Watch interview with
former PJV consultant, mid-2010 (name and location withheld by Human Rights
Watch).



[28] Human Rights Watch interview with former Porgera Joint Venture employee,
mid-2010 (name and location withheld by Human Rights Watch).



[29] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[30] Human Rights Watch interview with Mark Tony Ekepa, Anga Atalu and Jethro
Tulin, Port Moresby, May 18, 2010. See also Les Whittington, “Indigenous
leaders call for crackdown on Canadian mining abroad,” _Toronto Star,_ May 5,
2010, http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/article/804964--indigenous-leaders-
call-for-crackdown-on-canadian-mining-companies-abroad (accessed September 7,
2010).



[31] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with Barrick officials,
Porgera, November 23, 2010.



[32] As discussed above, the PLOA receives 12 percent of the royalties PJV
sets aside for the Enga Provincial Government and Porgeran landowners. See
above, footnote 10.



[33] Human Rights Watch interviews with Porgeran landowners, Porgera, May
2010.



[34] Human Rights Watch interview with Pala Teya, Porgera Station, May 13,
2010.



[35] Human Rights Watch interview #79, Porgera, May 13, 2010; Human Rights
Watch interview #81, Porgera, May 13, 2010.



[36] Lihir Mining Area Landowners Association, “Chairman’s Report,” _Lihir i
Lamel,_ March 2010.



[37] Human Rights Watch interview with Mark Tony Ekepa, Anga Atalu and Jethro
Tulin, Port Moresby, May 18, 2010.



[38] Ibid.



[39] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 2010; Human Rights Watch interviews with landowners, Porgera, May
2010.



[40] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 2010.



[41] See Polly Weissner, “Warfare in Enga Province: from prehistory to modern
times,” unpublished document, November 2007, p. 15, noting that “The frequency
of tribal warfare has increased rapidly in Enga over the past three decades
with the number of wars in the province more than doubling between 2001-2006;”
Independent State of Papua New Guinea, “Report of the Status of Women in Papua
New Guinea and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville: combined initial, first,
second, third and fourth periodic reports on the Convention of the Elimination
of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women,”July 2008.



[42] Jackson and Banks, _In Search of the Serpent’s Skin,_ p. 46.



[43] Estimates of the current population vary widely and are hotly contested.
Some SML landowners accuse Barrick of inflating its estimates of the local
population to make landowners’ demands for relocation to new land seem
impossible to satisfy. Human Rights Watch interview with Mark Tony Ekepa, Anga
Atalu, and Jethro Tulin, Port Moresby, May 18, 2010.



[44] See Bonnell, “Social Change in the Porgera Valley,” in Filer, ed.,
_Dilemmas of Development,_ pp. 19-57; Human Rights Watch interviews with
community leaders, government officials, and Barrick officials, Porgera, May
2010.



[45] Porgera Joint Venture, “Restoring Justice: Law and Justice Sector
Partnerships in the Papua New Guinea Highlands,” p. 5.



[46] Data on file with Human Rights Watch. Anthropologist Polly Weissner’s
data indicates that the most frequent causes of inter-clan warfare around
Porgera were land disputes, allegations of theft or property disputes, and
attempts at seeking revenge for earlier wrongs.



[47] Human Rights Watch interview with Senior Seargent Itapu Poko, Paiam town,
May 10, 2010.



[48] Paiam Town Development, “Fly In/Fly Out Agreement,” Part C(9).



[49] Human Rights Watch interviews with illegal miners, communities around
Porgera, May 2010.



[50] There is also a long tradition around Porgera—predating the PJV mine—of
referring to alluvial gold mining as a “second garden,” that is, a second
source of income in addition to farming the land.



[51] Human Rights Watch interview #13, Porgera, May 6, 2010.



[52] Human Rights Watch interviews with Barrick officials, Porgera mine site,
May 10, 2010.



[53] Human Rights Watch interview, #29, Porgera, May 7, 2010.



[54] Human Rights Watch interview #88, (location withheld), May 2010.



[55] Mining Act, no. 20 of 1992, art. 167(4)(a).



[56] Human Rights Watch interview with Edward Kupo, Magistrate Judge, Paiam
town, May 12, 2010.



[57] Information given by James Guand, Clerk of Court, Paiam, May 11, 2010.
According to Barrick, 315 illegal miners were detained in 2009 and 148 in the
first six months of 2010. Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[58] Human Rights Watch interview with Edward Kupo, May 12, 2010.



[59] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[60] Human Rights Watch interviews with illegal miners, Porgera, May 2010.



[61] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[62] Ibid. This figure does not include the cost of constructing a modern
security fence around the entire perimeter of the mine, a massive undertaking
that was nearly complete in late 2010.



[63] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[64] Barrick’s policy is for all APD detainees to be transferred into police
custody at Paiam “as soon as it is practical to do so following arrest.”
Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[65] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[66] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[67] Human Rights Watch interviews with current APD employee (#84), May 2010;
Human Rights Watch interview with former APD employee (#66), May 11, 2010.



[68] Akali Tange Association, “The Shooting Fields of Porgera Joint Venture:
Now a Case to Compensate and Justice to Prevail,” April 2005, pp. 65-76.



[69] Bob Burton, “Canadian Firm Admits to Killings and PNG Gold Mine,” _Inter
Press Service_ , November 18, 2005, http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=31074
(accessed August 25, 2010).



[70] Akali Tange Association, “The Shooting Fields of Porgera Joint Venture,”
pp. 65-76. Over the years many illegal miners have been injured or killed by
falling rocks in relatively unstable areas of the open pit. See, for example,
Jeffrey Elapa, “Falling rocks kill ‘miners,’” _The National_ , September 14,
2010, http://www.thenational.com.pg/?q=node/12564 (accessed September 15,
2010).



[71] The 2005 ATA report appended a copy of one such agreement. Akali Tange
Association, “The Shooting Fields of Porgera Joint Venture,” Appendix 9.



[72] _State vs. Fred Bukoya,_ National Court of Justice,Case No.CR1609 of
2002, Judgment, April 2010.



[73] ATA, “The Shooting Fields of Porgera Joint Venture,” Appendix 15:
Delegation of Authority— Sample. The agreement states that “… In recognition
of the duress and hardship, considering the amount of effort and work, time
and resource, cost and legal cost, commissions and material cost,
miscellaneous and other unforeseen factors, [the family members] do hereby
forever completely authorize the Special Working Committee of the Akali Tange
Association Inc do posses the legitimate and exclusive power to determine and
distribute compensation monies obtained on the body of the [deceased].” Ibid.



[74] Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interviews with Porgeran landowners, Porgera,
May 2010.



[75] See Harvard Law School International Human Rights Clinic and New York
University School of Law Center for Human Rights and Global Justice, “Legal
Brief before the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International
Development, House of Commons, Regarding Bill C-300,” November 16, 2009,
http://www.reports-and-materials.org/Harvard-testimony-re-Porgera-Main.pdf
(accessed September 15, 2010).



[76] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[77] Human Rights Watch interview with Sinclair Dinnen, The Australian
National University, Canberra, April 27, 2010.



[78] Human Rights Watch, _Making Their Own Rules: Police Beatings, Rape, and
Torture of Children in Papua New Guinea,_ (New York: Human Rights Watch,
2005), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2005/08/30/making-their-own-rules-0;
Human Rights Watch, _Still Making Their Own Rules: Ongoing Impunity for Police
Beatings, Rape, and Torture in Papua New Guinea_ , vol. 18, no. 13(C), October
2006, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/10/29/still-making-their-own-rules.



[79] United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, “UN
Special Rapporteur on Torture presents preliminary findings on his Mission to
Papua New Guinea,” May 25, 2010,
http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=10058&LangID=E
(accessed September 15, 2010).



[80] See below, Barrick’s Response to Human Rights Abuses at the Porgera Mine.



[81] Human Rights Watch interview with Anthony Smare, Porgera, November 22,
2010.



[82] “Porgera Joint Venture terminates employees after thorough internal
investigation: PJV Working in close cooperation with police,” Porgera Joint
Venture press release, January 17, 2011; “Police taskforce takes action
against violence towards women in Porgera,” Royal Papua New Guinea
Constabulary Media Release, January 17, 2011.



[83] Human Rights Watch interview #22, Porgera, May 6, 2010.



[84] Human Rights Watch interview #26, Porgera, May 7, 2010.



[85] Harvard and New York University, “Legal Brief before the Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Developement,” pp. 11-16.



[86] Ibid., pp. 11-12.



[87] Barrick Gold Corporation, “Submission to the Standing Committee on
Foreign Affairs and International Development,” November 26, 2009,
http://www.barrick.com/CorporateResponsibility/KeyTopics/Bill-C-300-Submission-
to-the-Standing-Committee/default.aspx (accessed January 21, 2011).



[88] Harvard and New York University, “Legal Brief before the Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Developement,” pp. 16-24.



[89] Human Rights Watch interview #82, Porgera, May 14, 2010.



[90] Human Rights Watch interview #22, Porgera, May 6, 2010.



[91] Human Rights Watch interviews #64, 68, 69, 74, Porgera, May 2010.



[92] Human Rights Watch interview #25, Porgera, May 7, 2010.



[93] Human Rights Watch interview #64, Porgera, May 11, 2010.



[94] Human Rights Watch interview #60, Porgera, May 11, 2010.



[95] Human Rights Watch interview #27, Porgera, May 7, 2010.



[96] Human Rights Watch interview #83, Porgera, May 14, 2010.



[97] Human Rights Watch interview #39, Porgera, May 9, 2010.



[98] Human Rights Watch interview #56, Porgera, May 11, 2010.



[99] Human Rights Watch interview #14, Porgera, May 6, 2010. APD personnel are
equipped with a “hand-held pepper spray equivalent.” Human Rights Watch
interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[100] Human Rights Watch interview #15, Porgera, May 6, 2010.



[101] Human Rights Watch interview #16, Porgera, May 6, 2010.



[102] See above, “Violence and Illegal Mining: PJV’s Security Challenges.”



[103] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[104] United Nations, “UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by
Law Enforcement Officials,” August 7, 1990, Sec. 4,
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/firearms.htm (accessed November 12, 2010).



[105] Human Rights Watch interviews #17, #28, #30, #62, #63, and #73, Porgera,
May 2010.



[106] Human Rights Watch interviews #64 and #65, Porgera, May 2010.



[107] See Amnesty International, “Undermining Rights: Forced evictions and
police brutality around the Porgera gold mine, Papua New Guinea,” AI Index:
ASA/34/001/2010, February 2, 2010,
http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA34/001/2010/en (accessed September
15, 2010), p. 5.



[108] In April 2009 PJV and the police signed an agreement providing that PJV
would provide the deployment with “’limited passive [in kind] support’… in the
form of food, lodging and fuel.” Barrick Gold, “Police Deployment, Enga
Province, Papua New Guinea (PNG),
http://www.barrick.com/CorporateResponsibility/KeyTopics/PorgeraJV/PoliceDeployment/default.aspx
(accessed January 21, 2011).



[109] The mobile police have adhered to what one expert described as “a long
tradition from colonial policing—very militarized, mostly about pacifying and
teaching people a lesson, not investigating crime or anything like that.”
Human Rights Watch interview with Sinclair Dinnen, The Australian National
University, Canberra, April 27, 2010.



[110] Amnesty International, “Undermining Rights,” p. 20.



[111] Ibid., pp. 5-7.



[112] Human Rights Watch interviews with former residents of Wuangima,
Porgera, May 2010; Amnesty International,



“Undermining Rights,” p. 7.



[113] Letter from Patrick Garver, former Barrick Executive Vice President and
General Counsel, to Irene Khan, Amnesty International Secretary General, May
22, 2009; Human Rights Watch interviews with PJV employees, Porgera, May 2010.



[114] Amnesty International, “Undermining Rights,” p. 11.



[115] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[116] Human Rights Watch interview with Ila Geno, Port Moresby, April 30,
2010.



[117] Human Rights Watch interview with mobile police section commander (#49,
name withheld), Porgera Station, May 10, 2010.



[118] Human Rights Watch interviews with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010. See also Porgera Alliance, “Three Girls Raped at Porgera
Mine Site,” July 10, 2010, http://www.porgeraalliance.net/2010/07/three-girls-
raped-at-porgera-mine-site/ (accessed September 15, 2010).



[119] Amnesty International, “Undermining Rights,” p. 20.



[120] Human Rights Watch interview with Senior Seargent Itapu Poko, Paiam
town, May 10, 2010.



[121] Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Moises Garanda, Paiam town, May 7,
2010.



[122] Porgera Joint Venture, “Restoring Justice: Law and Justice Sector
Partnerships in the Papua New Guinea Highlands;” Human Rights Watch interview
with senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[123] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[124] There is, however, as yet no shared understanding of the full scope of
businesses’ human rights responsibilities, whether these are or should be
binding under international law, and if so, how they can best be enforced. In
the past such issues have proven highly contentious.



[125] See United Nations Global Compact, “The Ten Principles,” at
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/TheTenPrinciples/index.html
(accessed October 4, 2010).



[126] See United Nations Global Compact, “Principle 2,”
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/TheTenPrinciples/Principle2.html
(accessed October 4, 2010).



[127] The Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights,
http://voluntaryprinciples.org/ (accessed October 4, 2010).



[128] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[129] The Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights,
http://voluntaryprinciples.org/ (accessed October 4, 2010).



[130] For an extensive catalogue of allegations that have been leveled against
the company see the website of an NGO called Protest Barrick at
http://www.protestbarrick.net (accessed September 20, 2010).



[131] For instance, Barrick claims that in March 2009 a speaker affiliated
with Protest Barrick publicly stated that the company is responsible for the
murder of sixty people around the Porgera mine every year, an absurd
allegation if it was actually leveled, given that this figure is far higher
than the total number of deaths the mine’s most strident critics implicate the
company in during the entire period of the mine’s existence.Letter from
Barrick Gold Corporation to Joanne Bauer and Chris Avery, June 16, 2009,
http://www.reports-and-materials.org/Barrick-Gold-response-re-Porgera-
mine-16-Jun-2009.pdf (accessed October 6, 2010).



[132] See above, the Mobile Police Deployment in Porgera.



[133] “Statement on Amnesty International Report,” Barrick and Porgera Joint
Venture Statement, February 2, 2010,
http://www.barrick.com/CorporateResponsibility/KeyTopics/PorgeraJV/Amnesty/default.aspx
(accessed October 6, 2010). Amnesty described Barrick’s response as “wholly
inadequate.” “Barrick response to evidence of human rights violations wholly
inadequate: Amnesty International calls on Canadian government to act,”
Amnesty International media release, February 3, 2010,
http://www.amnesty.ca/resource_centre/news/view.php?load=arcview&article=5150&c=Resource+Centre+News
(accessed October 6, 2010).



[134] Council on Ethics, The Government Pension Fund—Global, “Recommendation
of 14 August
2008,”http://www.regjeringen.no/pages/2146647/Recommendation%20Barrick%20final.pdf
(accessed September 7, 2010) p. 25.



[135] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[136] Letter from Barrick Gold to Chris Albin-Lackey, December 23, 2010 (see
annex).



[137] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[138] Ibid.



[139] Ibid.



[140] Ibid.



[141] Ibid; Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[142] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010. In September 2007, APD referred a
case to the police involving a security guard who cut a local youth on the leg
with a bush knife. Ibid.



[143] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[144] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[145] Several interviewees spoke of APD personnel shooting them with “rubber
bullets.” APD does not use rubber bullets and the interviewees were almost
certainly referring to beanbag projectiles.



[146] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with current APD security
force member (interview #84), (location withheld), May 2010.



[147] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[148] Human Rights Watch interview with Ila Temu and Anthony Smare, Port
Moresby, April 30, 2010.



[149] Ibid.



[150] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[151] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[152] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[153] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[154] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010, p. 2.



[155]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ila Geno, Port Moresby,
September 21, 2010.



[156] Human Rights Watch interview with Ila Geno, Porgera, November 23, 2010.



[157] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[158] Letter from Barrick, p. 3.



[159] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[160] Human Rights Watch interview with Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera,
November 22, 2010.



[161] Letter from Barrick, p. 3.



[162] Human Rights Watch interview with Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera,
November 22, 2010.



[163] “Porgera Joint Venture terminates employees after thorough internal
investigation: PJV Working in close cooperation with police,” Porgera Joint
Venture press release, January 17, 2011.



[164] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[165] Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sybil Veenman and Peter
Sinclair, January 18, 2011.



[166] “Porgera Joint Venture terminates employees after thorough internal
investigation: PJV Working in close cooperation with police,” Porgera Joint
Venture press release, January 17, 2011; “Police taskforce takes action
against violence towards women in Porgera,” Royal Papua New Guinea
Constabulary Media Release, January 17, 2011.



[167] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[168] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010; Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[169] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[170] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[171] Ibid.



[172] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010; Human Rights Watch meeting with
senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[173] Ibid. For more on the Restoring Justice initiative, see _Restoring
Justice: Law and Justice Sector Partnerships in the Papua New Guinea
Highlands_. For an overview of Barricks’ rationale for the program, see
Barrick Gold Corporation, “Barrick in Papua New Guinea: A special report on
Porgera,” _Beyond Borders: Responsible Mining at Barrick Gold Corporation_ ,
September 8, 2010, http://barrickbeyondborders.com/2010/09/barrick-in-papua-
new-guinea (accessed October 5, 2010).



[174] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with
Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera, November 22, 2010.



[175] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[176] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[177] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[178] Ibid.



[179] Human Rights Watch interview with Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera,
November 22, 2010.



[180] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[181] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010; Human Rights Watch meeting with
senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[182] Human Rights Watch interview with Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera,
November 22, 2010.



[183] Ibid.



[184] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010; Human Rights Watch meeting with
senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[185] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[186] Human Rights Watch meeting with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[187] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[188] Human Rights Watch interview with Mac Grace and Anthony Smare, Porgera,
November 22, 2010.



[189] Letter from Barrick, December 23, 2010.



[190] Ibid.



[191] In 2008 the Porgera mine produced 632,000 ounces of gold and 6.05
million tons of tailings. This is in addition to another 12.5 million tons of
suspended sediments that enter the river system through the Anawe and Anjolek
erodible waste dumps. Porgera Joint Venture, “Information booklet;” Porgera
Environmental Advisory Komiti (PEAK), “Strickland River Report Card
2009,”2009, http://www.peakpng.org.pg/docs/Report%20Card%20Oct%2009-Final.pdf
(accessed September 16, 2010). For more on the conversion of PJV’s creation
and disposal of tailings, see IIED, “Mining for the Future,” sec 3.1.



[192] Human Rights Watch interviews, Porgera, May 2010. See also Aletta
Biersack, “Red River, Green War: The Politics of Place along the Porgera
River,” in Aletta Biersack and James B. Greenberg, eds., _Reimaging Political
Ecology_ (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), noting for example that, “Many
consider contact with the river lethal” (p. 234) and that as early as 1992
“[M]any villagers claimed to be ‘genuinely afraid that this red water is
harmful or poisonous’” (p. 255).



[193] See Jackson and Banks, _In Search of the Serpent’s Skin,_ pp. 240-270;
IIED, “Mining for the Future.”



[194] Euralia Pane, “Porgera gold waste plan is rejected,” _Papua New Guinea
Post Courier_ , February 16, 1988, p. 1.



[195] Barrick cites factors including the speed and high sediment load of the
river, its naturally low population of aquatic life, and the absence of large
communities that regularly utilize its upper reaches for water or food. Human
Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9,
2010; Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[196] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[197] See Mineral Policy Institute, “The Porgera File: Adding to Australia’s
Legacy of Destruction,” December 1995,
http://users.nlc.net.au/mpi/reports/porgera_report_print.html (accessed
September 7, 2010).



[198] Council on Ethics, The Government Pension Fund—Global, “Recommendation
of 14 August 2008,” p.25,
http://www.regjeringen.no/pages/2146647/Recommendation%20Barrick%20final.pdf
(accessed September 7, 2010).



[199] The 2003 final report of the World Bank’s Extractive Industries Review
stated that “no [World Bank Group]-supported mining project should use
riverine tailings disposal,”
http://irispublic.worldbank.org/85257559006C22E9/All+Documents/85257559006C22E985256FF6006843AB/$File/volume1english.pdf
(accessed January 21, 2011). The International Finance Corporation’s
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for Mining state that “Riverine
[for example, rivers, lakes and lagoons] tailings disposal is not considered
good international industry practice.” International Finance Corporation,
“Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for Mining,” December 10, 2007,
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/sustainability.nsf/AttachmentsByTitle/gui_EHSGuidelines2007_Mining/$FILE/Final+-+Mining.pdf
(accessed September 7, 2010).



[200] PNG’s larger Ok Tedi mine also employs riverine tailings disposal, as
well as the Freeport mine on the Indonesian half of the island of Papua. See
also International Institute for Environment and Development, _Breaking New
Ground: Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development_ (London: Earthscan,
2002), http://www.wbcsd.org/DocRoot/ev8jEJvTiMYd4mJhGGHQ/finalmmsdreport.pdf
(accessed September 16, 2010), p. 242, noting that “Riverine disposal is also
currently used by many small-scale artisanal miners, by a number of small or
medium companies, and at an unknown number of sites in Russia and China.”



[201] Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Moises Granada, Porgera, November
2010.



[202] Human Rights Watch interview with Senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[203] Bob Burton, “BHP admits Ok Tedi mine is environmental disaster,” _Asia
Times_ , August 13, 1999, http://www.atimes.com/oceania/AH13Ah01.html
(accessed September 17, 2010).



[204] BHP Billiton, “Resourcing the Future: Our Sustainability Framework,” May
2010,
http://www.bhpbilliton.com/bbContentRepository/docs/ourSustainabilityFramework.pdf
(accessed September 17, 2010), p. 5.



[205] Barrick Gold, “Porgera Mine ResponsibilityReport,” Fall 2009,
http://www.barrick.com/Theme/Barrick/files/docs_performance/2009-Fall-Porgera-
Responsibility-Report.pdf (accessed September 16, 2010), p. 2.



[206] PEAK, “Strickland River Report Card.”



[207] Council on Ethics, The Government Pension Fund—Global, “Recommendation
of 14 August 2008, p. 13.



[208] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010; Human Rights Watch interview with
senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[209] Council on Ethics, The Government Pension Fund—Global, “Recommendation
of 14 August 2008, p. 25.



[210] PEAK, “Strickland River Report Card.”



[211] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[212] Ibid.



[213] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[214] PJV’s 1988 environmental plan—produced before the mine was
built—asserted that “retention of Porgera tailing in permanently secure
impoundments is impossible” and recommended riverine discharge. Porgera Joint
Venture, “Porgera Gold Project Environmental Plan,” Volume B, January 1988,
pp. 23-24.



[215] See, for example, Len Murray and Mark Thompson, “Obstacles to On-Land
Mine Tailings Disposal in Papua New Guinea,” Klohn Crippen Berger,
http://www.infomine.com/publications/docs/Murray.pdf (accessed September 10,
2010), p. 18.



[216] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010.



[217] Barrick declined to provide Human Rights Watch with a copy of the study
on the grounds that it was “prepared for internal purposes only” and is
“considered proprietary and commercial-in-confidence.”Letter from Smare,
September 7, 2010.



[218] Letter from Smare, September 7, 2010. When Human Rights Watch visited
Porgera in May 2010 PJV was in the process of constructing a tailings paste
production plant at an estimated cost of $42 million. Paste is easier to
dispose of safely than liquid tailings in difficult environments like Porgera,
but the process can be very expensive. The PJV paste plant, scheduled to be
functioning at the end of 2010, aims to convert “up to ten percent” of the
mine’s tailings into paste that will be mixed with cement and used to fill up
unused portions of the mine’s underground operations. Letter from Smare,
September 7, 2010. PJV asserts that it cannot convert more tailings into paste
than this because it has nowhere to store it. Human Rights Watch interview
with senior Barrick officials, Toronto, September 9, 2010.



[219] See, for example, Cathy Reto, “Possible mercury poisoning in alluvial
gold miners in the Porgera valley, Papua New Guinea,” _Journal of Rural and
Remote Environmental Health_ , vol. 1 (2002), p. 10, asserting that “Silent
mercury poisoning among alluvial miners in the Porgera Valley, which is yet to
be addressed, is causing more immediate serious human health effects than
environmental degradation.”



[220] Human Rights Watch interviews with illegal miners, Porgera, May 2010.
See also Reto, “Possible mercury poisoning in alluvial gold miners,” p. 10.



[221] See US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA), “Mercury Report to
Congress Office of Air Quality and Standards,” vol. 5 (Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency, 1997),
http://www.epa.gov/ttnatw01/112nmerc/volume5.pdf (accessed October 12, 2010);
US EPA, “Mercury Report to Congress Office of Air Quality and Standards,” vol.
7, http://www.epa.gov/ttnatw01/112nmerc/volume7.pdf (accessed October 12,
2010); US Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR),
_Toxicological Profile for Mercury_ , (Atlanta: ATSDR, 1999), pp. 29-161,
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp46.pdf (accessed October 12, 2010). For
a brief and easily accessible summary of mercury’s known effects on human
health, see ATSDR, _ToxFAQs: Mercury,_ April 1999,
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/tfacts46.pdf (accessed October 12, 2010).



[222] See B.J. Koos and L.D. Longo, “Mercury toxicity in the pregnant woman,
fetus, and newborn infant,” _American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,_
126(3), Oct 1, 1976; pp. 390-40; ATSDR, _Toxicological Profile for Mercury,_
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp46.pdf (accessed January 21, 2011), pp.
301-310.



[223] Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Moises Granada, Paiam, November
2010.



[224] Human Rights Watch interviews with illegal miners, Porgera, May 2010.
For a discussion of the difficulties encountered by efforts to persuade small-
scale and illegal miners in Ghana to use retorts, which raises many issues
that are mirrored in the context of Porgera, see Gavin Hilson, Christopher J.
Hilson, and Sandra Pardie, “Improving awareness of mercury pollution in small-
scale gold mining communities: challenges and ways forward in rural Ghana,”
_Environmental Research_ , no. 103 (2007), pp. 275-287.



[225] Human Rights Watch interviews with illegal miners, Porgera, May 2010.
See also Reto, “Possible mercury poisoning in alluvial miners,” p. 11,
describing the case of a PJV employee who got chronic mercury poisoning from
cooking amalgam inside his house, which he said he did because he was stealing
the gold from PJV and did not want to be caught.



[226] Human Rights Watch interviews with Barrick officials, Port Moresby, May
2010.



[227] The country is a leading producer of uranium, potash, nickel, cobalt,
aluminum, and platinum. Mining Association of Canada, “Facts and Figures 2009:
a report on the state of the Canadian mining industry,”
http://www.mining.ca/www/media_lib/MAC_Documents/Publications/2009/2009_F_and_F_English.pdf
(accessed September 17, 2010), p. 67. The country is home to a range of
international mining giants and, according to the Mining Association of
Canada, some 60 percent of the world’s exploration companies. Over 1400
Canadian and international companies are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange
and roughly half the projects of listed companies are outside of Canada.
Mining Association of Canada, “The Canadian Mining Industry: Overview, Issues
and the Way Forward,”April 2010,
http://www.mining.ca/www/media_lib/MAC_Documents/Presentations/2010/04_12_10_Expomin_2010eng1.pdf
(accessed September 17, 2010), p. 6.



[228] See The Commission of Inquiry Generally into the Ministry of Finance,
“Final Report,”October 29, 2009; Rowan Callick, “$300 million pillaged in
Papua New Guinea graft,” _The Australian,_ April 30, 2010,
http://masalai.wordpress.com/2010/04/30/300-million-pillaged-in-papua-new-
guinea-graft/ (accessed September 17, 2010); Jonathan Tannos, “Billions of
kina being pocketed,” _Papua New Guinea Post-Courier_ , March 30, 2010; Bill
Reilly, “The Africanisation of the South Pacific,” _Australian Journal of
International Affairs,_ vol. 54, no. 3 (2000), pp. 261-268; National Research
Institute, “Papua New Guinea’s Development Performance: 1975-2008,”September
2010, pp. 141-159; Human Rights Watch, _Making Their Own Rules;_ Human Rights
Watch, _Still Making Their Own Rules_.



[229] The Centre for Environmental Law and Community Rights, “Bulldozing
Progress: Human Rights Abuses and Corruption in Papua New Guinea’s Large Scale
Logging Industry,”August 2006, http://www.illegal-
logging.info/uploads/ACF_PNG_Full_Report.pdf (accessed September 7, 2010).



[230] See Liam Fox, “Court scuppers miner’s waste pipeline,” _Australian
Broadcasting Corporation News_ , March 22, 2010,
http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2010/03/22/2852734.htm?section=world
(accessed September 17, 2010). Deep Sea Tailings Disposal is a controversial
practice whose likely environmental impacts are fiercely debated. See Mining
Watch Canada, “Submarine/Subaqueous Tailings Disposal,”
http://www.miningwatch.ca/en/home/issue/submarinesubaqueous-tailings-disposal
(accessed September 17, 2010).



[231] Environment (Amendment) Bill (2010),
http://actnowpng.org/sites/default/files/Amend%20Enivrn%20Act-1.pdf (accessed
September 17, 2010).



[232] Human Rights Watch interview with Senior Seargent Itapu Poko, Paiam
town, May 10, 2010.



[233] Human Rights Watch interview with Ila Geno, Port Moresby, April 30,
2010.



[234] Human Rights Watch interview with senior Barrick officials, Toronto,
September 9, 2010.



[235] The bill was a private member’s bill introduced by John McKay, a Liberal
MP representing Toronto’s Scarborough-Guildwood constituency.



[236] The standards that would be incorporated into the guidelines are:
several sources of IFC standards on social, environmental, and health issues;
the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights; and “human rights
provisions that ensure corporations operate in a manner that is consistent
with international human rights standards.”Bill C-300, An Act respecting
Corporate Accountability for the Activities of Mining, Oil or Gas in
Developing Countries, February 2009, sec 5(2),
http://www2.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?Docid=3658424&file=4
(accessed September 17, 2010).



[237] See Mining Association of Canada, “Briefing Note: November 2009,”
http://www.mining.ca/www/media_lib/MAC_Documents/Briefs/2009/11242009_Final_C300_Briefing_Note.pdf
(accessed September 17, 2010); Peter Munk, Barrick Gold Chairman, “Lack of
Support for Mining Bill,” letter to the editor, _Toronto Star_ , October 31,
2010, http://www.thestar.com/opinion/letters/article/883400--lack-of-support-
for-mining-bill (accessed January 21, 2011).



[238] For instance, the Mining Association of Canada has argued that C-300
would “restrict access to credit for Canadian companies, effectively forcing
them out of the market” and that “under C-300, the void left by Canadian
companies is more likely to be filled by other international players with
little regard for [Corporate Social Responsibility].” Mining Association of
Canada, “Briefing Note: November 2009,”
http://www.mining.ca/www/media_lib/MAC_Documents/Briefs/2009/11242009_Final_C300_Briefing_Note.pdf
(accessed September 17, 2010).



[239] See Chris Albin-Lackey and James Ron, “Ignatieff has some explaining to
do,” _Ottawa Citizen_ , November 4, 2010,
http://www.ottawacitizen.com/story_print.html?id=3775950&sponsor= (accessed
November 8, 2010).



[240] National Roundtables on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and the
Canadian Extractive Industry in Developing Countries, “Advisory Group
Report,”March 29, 2007, http://www.pdac.ca/pdac/misc/pdf/070329-advisory-
group-report-eng.pdf (accessed January 21, 2011).



Systemic Failures Underscore Need for Canadian Government Regulation



Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide,
spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice



**Human Rights Watch** is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under
EIN: 13-2875808

