Help us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our
work



Systemic Failures Underscore Need for Canadian Government Regulation



Share this via Facebook Share this via Twitter Share this via WhatsApp Share
this via Email Other ways to share Share this via LinkedIn Share this via
Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer



(Toronto) - Private security personnel employed at a gold mine in Papua New
Guinea have been implicated in alleged gang rapes and other violent abuses,
Human Rights Watch said in a report released today. The Porgera mine has
produced billions of dollars of gold in its twenty years of operation, and is
operated and 95 percent owned by Barrick Gold, a Canadian company that is the
world's largest gold producer.



The 94-page report, "Gold's Costly Dividend: Human Rights Impacts of Papua New
Guinea's Porgera Gold Mine," identifies systemic failures on the part of
Toronto-based Barrick Gold that kept the company from recognizing the risk of
abuses, and responding to allegations that abuses had occurred. The report
examines the impact of Canada's failure to regulate the overseas activities of
its companies and also calls on Barrick to address environmental and health
concerns around the mine with greater transparency.



"We interviewed women who described brutal gang rapes by security guards at
Barrick's mine," said Chris Albin-Lackey, senior business and human rights
researcher at Human Rights Watch. "The company should have acted long before
Human Rights Watch conducted its research and prompted them into action".



Human Rights Watch said that in response to its investigation, Barrick has
taken meaningful steps to investigate past abuses and make it less likely for
similar abuses to occur in future.



Most of the world's mining and exploration companies are based in Canada. But
Canada's government has not exercised meaningful oversight or regulation of
the overseas operations of Canadian companies, Human Rights Watch said. Bill
C-300, a modest but important effort to impose greater government oversight,
was defeated in Canada's House of Commons in October 2010. Barrick had lobbied
vigorously against the measure.



"Canada's government is asleep at the wheel," Albin-Lackey said. "And if
Barrick wants to hold itself out as a responsible corporate citizen, it should
support meaningful government oversight and regulation of Canadian companies."



Papua New Guinea's sprawling Porgera gold mine has produced more than 16
million ounces of gold since opening in 1990 - an amount that would be worth
more than US$20 billion at today's prices. In 2010, Barrick's worldwide
operations were on track to produce more than 7.5 million ounces of gold, an
amount worth more than $9.7 billion at current prices.



Papua New Guinea has an abundance of natural resources, but poor governance
and corruption have prevented this wealth from benefitting ordinary citizens.
The government has failed to bring economic opportunity or deliver basic
government services to Porgera, and the region is mired in poverty and
violence.



Barrick maintains a private security force of nearly 450 personnel at Porgera.
The mine must cope with extraordinary security challenges, including violent
raids by groups of illegal miners. But Human Rights Watch research documents
opportunistic, violent abuses allegedly committed by some security force
members that are in no way a reaction to these threats.



Every day, hundreds of people try to eke out a living by scouring the waste
rock dumps around the mine for minute traces of gold. In contrast to the
participants in violent raids that the mine confronts on a regular basis,
these miners are for the most part engaged in an entirely nonviolent - albeit
unauthorized - practice. They face arrest by company security officers if they
are caught on the waste dumps.



Human Rights Watch investigated six alleged incidents of gang rape by company
security personnel. In each case, women were allegedly raped after being
captured by company security personnel on the waste dumps. The women
interviewed by Human Rights Watch described scenes of extreme violence. One
described being gang raped by six security personnel after one of her
assailants kicked her in the face and shattered her teeth. Human Rights Watch
also documented cases of people who alleged that they were beaten or otherwise
mistreated by guards who apprehended them on the waste dumps.



None of the women interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they had reported the
alleged rapes to the local authorities or to the company. Some said their
assailants had told them they would be arrested if they tried to complain.
Compounding matters, Barrick did not have any safe channels of communication
that community members could use to report abuses.



Barrick has responded with appropriate vigor to the allegations brought
forward by Human Rights Watch. The company opened a major internal
investigation, facilitated a criminal investigation by the Papua New Guinea
police, and made a commitment to take steps that could strengthen oversight
and accountability for the security force at Porgera.



The alleged gang rapes appear to be part of a wider pattern, Human Rights
Watch said. The company and police investigations that followed the Human
Rights Watch disclosures have uncovered other cases of alleged sexual
violence.



In a public statement, Barrick called the results of its internal
investigation "disturbing" and announced the termination of several security
personnel for involvement in, or failure to report, alleged incidents of
sexual violence. Police arrested three current and former Porgera Joint
Venture employees in January, 2011. Two were charged with rape and the third
with inflicting grievous bodily harm.



A January 17 police statement predicted that more charges were likely to flow
from their investigation and said that the arrests should serve as a warning
that serious abuses will not be tolerated. That message is important but it
will take work to convince many people to believe it, Human Rights Watch said.



Members of the Papua New Guinea police force are regularly implicated in
incidents of torture and rape, and the force's abusive reputation makes the
public reluctant to turn to it for help. If the government wants to combat
impunity for rape and other serious crimes, it will have to start by ensuring
that the police themselves are held accountable for their conduct, Human
Rights Watch said.



Human Rights Watch's research also examines concerns about the health and
environmental impacts of the Porgera mine. The mine dumps 16,000 tons of
liquid waste into the nearby Porgera River every day. This controversial
practice is out of line with current industry standards, and critics worry
that it could pose health risks to communities far downstream.



Human Rights Watch called on Barrick to publish several specific sources of
relevant data to allow for independent evaluation of the company's claims. The
company has now agreed to make public its annual environmental reports for the
first time. This is a good first step, Human Rights Watch said.



Human Rights Watch also called for the Papua New Guinea government and
international donors to facilitate a public health survey of possible mercury
poisoning around Porgera. Impoverished small-scale and illegal miners in the
area regularly process gold ore by combining it with mercury and then burning
the combined materials over an open flame. This is an extremely dangerous
practice and one that local medical professionals believe may have given rise
to an untreated epidemic of mercury poisoning in local communities.



Union Busting in Cambodiaâ€™s Garment and Tourism Sectors



Human Rights Impacts of a China Belt and Road Project in Cambodia



Share this via Facebook Share this via Twitter Share this via WhatsApp Share
this via Email Other ways to share Share this via LinkedIn Share this via
Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer



Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide,
spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice



Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement
today.



 **Human Rights Watch** is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under
EIN: 13-2875808

