Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps
millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts,
books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.



Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps
millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts,
books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.



The best index funds can help you build wealth by diversifying your portfolio
while minimizing your fees. Investing in an index fund is less risky than
investing in individual stocks or bonds because index funds often hold
hundreds of securities. Index funds spread your investment risk across the
stocks or bonds of many different individual companies.



Index funds hold baskets of investments to track a market index, such as the
**S &P 500** (SNPINDEX: ^GSPC). Index funds are passively managed, meaning
that the fund's holdings are entirely determined by the index the fund tracks.
The goal of an index fund is to match the performance of the underlying index.
They're a good choice for long-term investors because you can lock in the
returns of the overall stock market or a specific segment of it.



The returns generated by an index fund generally never exceed the performance
of the index itself, if only because of index fund expense ratios, which are
the annual management fees collected by index fund managers. Since index funds
are passively managed, they are actually more likely over the long term to
outperform funds with active managers.



An index fund can either be a mutual fund or an exchange-traded fund (ETF).
Investors buy shares of mutual funds directly from asset management companies;
shares in ETFs are purchased and sold through stock exchanges.



Consider these key factors when picking an index fund:



Our picks for the nine best index funds for 2022 can help you accomplish a
variety of investment goals. Plus, they have low expense ratios and low
minimum investments.



Because 2022 has been a tough year for stocks, many of the funds listed below
are down so far this year. But remember: Index investing is about building
wealth for the long haul. Don't let short-term volatility deter you from
getting started.



Investing in S&P 500 index funds is perhaps the closest thing to a guaranteed
way to build wealth over time. The **Fidelity ZERO Large Cap Index Fund**
(NASDAQMUTFUND:FNILX), which tracks an index of just over 500 U.S. large-cap
stocks, performs very similarly to an S&P 500 index fund. But because this
fund is not an official S&P 500 index fund, it avoids paying expensive
licensing fees to **S &P Global** (NYSE:SPGI), the index's parent company. The
fund tracks the **Fidelity U.S. Large Cap Index** as its benchmark.



The "ZERO" in the fund's name denotes that the expense ratio for this fund is
0%. There's also no minimum investment amount, making the fund a good choice
for beginning investors.



The fund moves in near-lockstep with the S&P 500. Total returns since its
inception in September 2018 were 43.4% as of mid-May 2022, just shy of the S&P
500's return of 44.2% during the same period. In early 2022, the fund was down
about 18%, slightly more than the S&P 500.



If you want to invest in an official S&P 500 index fund, then the **Schwab S
&P 500 Index Fund** (NASDAQMUTFUND:SWPPX) is about the cheapest you'll find.
Its expense ratio is 0.02%, meaning you'd annually pay just $0.20 for every
$1,000 you invest. Because this investment fee is so low, your returns are
virtually identical to the performance of the S&P 500.



In 2021, the fund's year-to-date total returns of 31.43% were almost identical
to the S&P 500's. By May 2022, both the fund and the S&P 500 were down about
16% for the year to date. There's no minimum investment amount, so you can
start investing with as little as $1.



If you want to assume more investment risk in the pursuit of higher rewards,
then the **Vanguard Growth ETF** (NYSEMKT:VUG) is a solid choice. The fund
tracks the **CRSP US Large Cap Growth Index** , which performs similarly to
the **S &P 500 Growth Index.** This ETF invests in 266 U.S. large-cap growth
stocks.



Tech stocks are heavily represented, accounting for 49.7% of the fund's
holdings, followed by consumer discretionary stocks (24%) and industrial
stocks (10.3%). Energy stocks and utility stocks combined make up only 0.9% of
the fund's value.



This ETF has a minuscule 0.04% expense ratio. As of Dec. 31, 2021, the fund's
average annual return over five years (before taxes) was 24.78%, easily
beating the S&P 500 over that period.



However, as tech stocks continue to nosedive in 2022, the fund was down
through May by around 28% -- significantly more than the S&P 500. Still,
investing in Vanguard's Growth ETF could present an opportunity to buy the
dip.



A top index fund for income-oriented investors is the **SPDR S &P Dividend ETF
**(NYSEMKT:SDY). The dividend-weighted fund's benchmark is the **S &P High
Yield Dividend Aristocrats Index**, which tracks 119 of the stocks in the **S
&P Composite 1500** **Index** with the highest dividend yields. All of the
companies owned by this ETF have increased their dividend payments annually
for at least 25 consecutive years.



Dividend-paying stocks tend to be less volatile compared to the overall stock
market. So it isn't surprising that the SPDR S&P 500 Dividend ETF was down
just over 3% for the year through May, significantly less than the S&P 500.



The fund's 12-month dividend yield as of May 2022, was 2.71% -- well above the
S&P 500's 1.46%. The expense ratio is also somewhat higher at 0.35%.



The fund's top five holdings are manufacturing corporation **Leggett & Platt
Inc.** (NYSE:LEG), **IBM** (NYSE:IBM), global packaging company **Amcor PLC**
(NYSE:AMCR), **ExxonMobil** (NYSE:XOM), and **National Retail Properties**
(NYSE:NNN), a real estate investment trust (REIT). Several REITs, which
typically pay high dividends because they're required to disburse at least 90%
of their taxable incomes, are included in the fund. The ETF is underweighted
in tech stocks, which don't tend to pay generous dividends.



If you want to invest across the real estate market, the **Vanguard Real
Estate ETF** (NYSEMKT:VNQ) is a solid, low-cost option. With an expense ratio
of 0.12%, it's also by far the largest real estate index fund, with about
$86.3% billion of assets under management.



Its benchmark index is the **MSCI US Investable Market Real Estate 25/50
Index** , which broadly tracks the U.S. real estate market. Although the index
includes a few real estate management and development companies, it consists
mostly of equity REITs, which own and operate income-producing real estate.



Because it invests primarily in REITs, the ETF is also attractive to dividend
investors. The fund's 12-month dividend yield as of May 2022 was 2.45%. The
Vanguard ETF may also appeal to investors concerned about inflation since real
estate is traditionally seen as an inflation hedge.



Browse top ETF brokerages



The **Vanguard Russell 2000 ETF** (NASDAQ:VTWO), which tracks the **Russell
2000** (RUSSELLINDICES:^RUT), is a good place to start for investors who want
to take advantage of the potential upside of investing in small-cap companies.
The fund invests in 2,032 small- and mid-cap companies that have a median
market capitalization of $2.9 billion.



As of March 31, 2022, the index fund's largest concentration was in healthcare
(16.1%), financials (15.9%), and industrials (15.4%). The fund's expense
ratio, at 0.1%, is relatively low, especially for one that offers exposure to
the companies with the most growth potential.



Like its benchmark index, the Vanguard Russell 2000 ETF underperformed the S&P
500 during the first five months of 2022, declining about 20%.



Thematic investors who want to capitalize on a long-term secular trend should
check out the **VanEck Semiconductor ETF** (NASDAQ:SMH). The index fund tracks
the **MVIS U.S. Listed Semiconductor 25 Index** , which tracks 25 domestic and
international companies that produce semiconductors and related equipment. It
has $7.8 billion in total net assets and an expense ratio of 0.35%.



It has been a rocky 2022 for semiconductor stocks amid ongoing chip shortages,
a broader tech sell-off, and a shortage of skilled workers. But plenty of
trends point to a bright future for the industry. These include the shift to
electric vehicles and 5G mobile technology and a continued surge in cloud-
based solutions.



With supply chain woes expected to persist for some time, the VanEck
Semiconductor ETF is only appropriate for investors with a long time horizon
and a relatively high risk tolerance. As of mid-May 2022, the fund was down
about 25%. But, with the semiconductor market projected to almost double by
2030, buying this index fund in a bear market could be a smart play for long-
term investors.



If you're seeking portfolio exposure to high-growth emerging markets but don't
want your risk concentrated in a single economy or region, the **Schwab
Emerging Markets Equity ETF** (NYSEMKT:SCHE) may be a good fit. It tracks the
FTSE Emerging Index, a collection of large- and mid-cap stocks in more than 20
developing countries. The fund has 1,843 holdings, with the largest
concentrations in China, Taiwan, India, Brazil, and South Africa. Its expense
ratio is only 0.11%.



The stocks of companies in emerging markets have historically underperformed
compared to U.S. stocks. Between 2012 and 2021, the Schwab emerging market
funds, on a combined basis, had total returns of about 67%. The S&P 500,
meanwhile, racked up total returns of more than 350%. Considering that about
85% of the world's population lives in developing countries, investors with a
long-term focus who are comfortable with volatility may want to seriously
consider investing in this fund.



Investors who are interested in sustainable investing should check out the
**Fidelity U.S. Sustainability Index Fund** (NASDAQMUTFUND:FITL.X). The fund's
benchmark is the MSCI USA ESG Leaders Index, which tracks the performances of
large- and mid-cap domestic stocks with above-average ESG ratings. The index
fund has a low expense ratio of 0.11% and no minimum investment amount.



The fund's largest concentrations as of March 31, 2022, are in the technology
(28.6%), healthcare (13.5%), and consumer discretionary (12.8%) sectors. This
sustainability ETF's top holdings are **Microsoft** (NASDAQ:MSFT), **Tesla**
(NASDAQ:TSLA), Google parent **Alphabet** (NASDAQ:GOOG)(NASDAQ:GOOGL),
**Nvidia** (NASDAQ:NVDA), and **Johnson & Johnson** (NYSE:JNJ).



Although ESG funds are appealing to those who want to invest with a
conscience, a strong ESG focus is also good for returns. Companies that pose
little ESG-related risk often deliver superior financial performance, making
ESG funds such as the Fidelity U.S. Sustainability Index Fund a good choice
for long-term investors.



Some index funds track the S&P 500. Which ones are the best investments for
you?



These top funds pay dividends, too. Learn about these potential investments.



So what kind of returns can you expect if you buy an index fund? Depends on
the fund.



Index funds track a particular index and can be a good way to invest.



Why do we invest this way? Learn More



Market-beating stocks from our award-winning analyst team.



Calculated by average return of all stock recommendations since inception of
the Stock Advisor service in February of 2002. Returns as of 11/23/2022.



Discounted offers are only available to new members. Stock Advisor list price
is $199 per year.



Calculated by Time-Weighted Return since 2002. Volatility profiles based on
trailing-three-year calculations of the standard deviation of service
investment returns.



Invest better with The Motley Fool. Get stock recommendations, portfolio
guidance, and more from The Motley Fool's premium services.



Making the world smarter, happier, and richer.





Market data powered by Xignite.

