





Remember Me





By PRNEWS



Our third annual Agency Elite Top 100 spotlights the most innovative PR and
communication firms.



To compile our list, we looked at a range of features and asked candidates
about new products, services and expertise offered during the past 12 months.
We wanted to better understand how the most innovative and flexible PR
agencies work in an increasingly fast-paced, ever-changing world.



The list is designed to demonstrate the wide range of industry specializations
and core capabilities that PR and communication encompass. This year’s list
highlights firms of all sizes (from boutique to global conglomerates), ages
(our oldest agency, HDMZ, was founded in 1936; the youngest, Agean Public
Relations and Victorious PR, were founded in 2020) and regions of the country.



Key specialties and represented industries are wide-ranging, reflecting the
depth and breadth of PR.



“This year’s Agency Elite Top 100 re-emphasizes the fact that innovative ideas
and successful campaigns come from a wide range of organizations, large and
small,” says Erika Bradbury, editorial director, PRNEWS. “In addition to their
campaign work, the agencies on this year’s list stood out for their internal
initiatives, community relationships and other business pivots they took in
response to the changing world.”



Many on this year's list expanded employee benefits and/or launched or grew
departments and client offerings, particularly in DEI, ESG, content creation
and digital integration. To support diversity and inclusion, many expanded pro
bono initiatives, developed more inclusive hiring practices, evolved their
internship programs and/or signed pledges with organizations such as the
Diversity Action Alliance.



We asked applicants to don their “futurecast goggles” and tell us about trends
the industry will talk about during the next five years. We’ll explore many of
these in our future coverage.



Click here for the 2023 Agency Elite Top 100.



 **Find a Job** | **Post a Job**

