**_Evolution of a Movement: Four Decades of California Environmental Justice
Activism_ by Tracy E. Perkins**



In some views, environmental justice and California might be synonymous. Yet
definitions concerning the relationship between the environment and justice
have changed over time, as well as the approaches and ideas that activists
employ to reach their goals. Tracy E. Perkin's new book, _Evolution of a
Movement: Four Decades of California Environmental Justice Activism_ ,
published by the University of California Press in 2022, offers insight into
half of century of the changing conditions of environmental activism.



"Despite living and working in California, one of the county's most
environmentally progressive states, environmental justice activists have spent
decades fighting for clean air to breathe, clean water to drink, and safe,
healthy communities. _Evolution of a Movement_ tells their story—from the
often-raucous protests of the 1980s and 1990s to activists' growing presence
inside the halls of the state capitol in the 2000s and 2010s. Tracy E. Perkins
traces how shifting political contexts combined with activists' own efforts to
institutionalize their work within nonprofits and state structures. By
revealing these struggles and transformations, Perkins offers a new lens for
understanding environmental justice activism in California."





Utilizing maps, Perkin's explores the shifting tactics and strategies of
movement organizations, as well as changes in understanding and theorizing the
variable role of the state to bring about social change.



"At a time when environmental justice scholars and activists face pressing
questions about the best route for effecting meaningful change, this book
provides insight into the strengths and limitations of social movement
institutionalization."



For a sense of what is in the book, here is the table of contents:



Introduction: Environmental Justice Activism Then and Now  
  
1\. Emergence of the Disruptive Environmental Justice Movement  
2\. The Institutionalization of the Environmental Justice Movement  
3\. Explaining the Changes in Environmental Justice Activism  
4\. Kettleman City: Case Study of Community Activism in Changing Times  
5\. California Climate Change Bill AB 32: Case Study of Policy Advocacy  
6\. Conclusion: Dilemmas of Contemporary Environmental Justice Activism



Here is a link to the University of California Press webpage for the book.



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/old-
books.jpg?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1) The site Pages on Pages allows you to search
for a book to see where you can find it for the cheapest price. Browse through
both new and used options to find textbooks, novels, comics, and more. I try
to visit my local used book store in person when possible, but if you need
something… READ THE REST



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/cultofthedead.jpg?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1) The first
half of this new book's title is fire (and brimstone, for the heretics). Cult
of the Dead: A Brief History of Christianity, by Kyle Smith, recently
published by the University of California Press, analyzes the cultural impact
of martyrdom and death. "Though it promises eternal life, Christianity was
forged in death. Christianity is… READ THE REST



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/image-24.png?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1) Día de Muertos,
Day of the Dead, is a two-day celebration and remembrance of family and
friends who have passed on to their ancestors. Convening in cemeteries and
homes, altars are made with pictures, favorite foods and libations, candles,
copal, and other incense, and flowers, specifically bright yellow cempasúchil,
or flowers of the dead—marigolds in… READ THE REST



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/sale_274534_article_image.jpeg?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1)
We thank our sponsor for making this content possible; it is not written by
the editorial staff nor does it necessarily reflect its views. 'Tis the season
to show gratitude to friends, family, good times, and the gifts Mother Earth
has graciously brought to our tables. (TYSM to her, even though humans have
been super ungrateful… READ THE REST



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/sale_56309_article_image.jpeg?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1)
We thank our sponsor for making this content possible; it is not written by
the editorial staff nor does it necessarily reflect its views. Nowadays,
keeping our personal information safe is more important than ever. A private
phone line from Hushed can hide your actual phone number when signing up for
newsletters, online dating, or whenever you need… READ THE REST



![](https://i0.wp.com/boingboing.net/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/tMQNjoy.jpeg?resize=250%2C190&ssl=1) We thank our
sponsor for making this content possible; it is not written by the editorial
staff nor does it necessarily reflect its views. The holidays are around the
corner, and the holidays are a time to show gratitude to others. We're
thankful for you this time of year, so we're showing our appreciation by… READ
THE REST



Read the rules you agree to by using this website in our Terms of Service.



We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an
affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees
by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.



Boing Boing uses cookies and analytics trackers, and is supported by
advertising, merchandise sales and affiliate links. Read about what we do with
the data we gather in our Privacy Policy.



Who will be eaten first? Our forum rules are detailed in the Community
Guidelines.



Boing Boing is published under a Creative Commons license except where
otherwise noted.

