Photo credit



A quarter century ago, Tom Peters helped make the term “personal branding”
part of our vocabulary—long before the prevalence of social media, vast
globalization, the infusion of millennials and Gen Zs into the workforce and
the new WFA (work from anywhere) model. Some of the original tools for
personal branding are now museum pieces, but the importance of uncovering,
expressing and expanding your personal brand has never before been so vital,
not only for individual career success but also for organizations that seek to
inspire, engage and retain their talent. Here’s how the world of personal
branding is being transformed:



 **Today’s workforce demands transparency, authenticity, individuality and
recognition**



Millennials and Gen Z employees want to be recognized for their unique skills
and talents. The personal brands of your company’s leaders and employees have
a major impact on the organization’s ability to hire, engage and retain top
talent. In fact, for millennials who are looking to join your company, the
brand of your organization and the brand of its leaders are equally important
(in terms of recruiting) to the job that is being offered. In the hiring
process, leaders and other team members are being googled. In the war for top
talent, it’s essential that the company brand and the brands of your people
stand out from the competition to attract the best.



 **Your people are now a part of the company brand**



Personal branding is no longer reserved just for senior executives or sales
leaders; it’s for all employees at all levels and in all functions. According
to Nielsen, only 33% of buyers trust the brand while 90% of customers trust
product or service recommendations from people they know. Your employees can
have a major impact on corporate success—way beyond their official job
description. The face of the brand, although managed by the CMO, is no longer
centrally controlled. Every employee has a role to play in expressing and
enhancing the company brand. This new approach, called applied personal
branding, begins with helping employees uncover and build their brands,
followed by teaching them to apply their personal brand to the mission of the
company in an authentic way. Consider these statistics:







When employees can learn about their brand and understand their role in
building the corporate brand and, most importantly, when they are empowered to
do so, they can impact corporate success far beyond their assigned role. As a
bonus, they stay engaged even outside their job function and division, and
they are more aware of what’s going on in the organization at a higher level.



 **WFA enhances the need for personal branding**



The new post-Covid hybrid work model, Work From Anywhere, means remote work
will be a major part of the work environment. That presents new challenges for
being visible and demonstrating value to key stakeholders. Out of sight, out
of mind means it’s now essential to take daily deliberate action to stay top
of mind no matter where you are. Brand building needs to take priority on your
Do-list.



 **Digital branding precedes real branding**



Even for companies with robust intranets, employees are using Google and
LinkedIn to learn about colleagues and leaders. Employees who work remotely
don’t get to share their brand in the coffee room or at the water cooler.
Therefore, the digital version of remote employees’ brands must be authentic,
compelling and magnetic for teams to be able to build trust and engage fully.
We learned that lesson when social media first arose. Branding has moved
online. As identified by Mitch Joel in the book _Ctrl Alt Delete_, people
learn about companies and individuals online before ever engaging in person
(if they engage in person at all . . . that’s no longer essential). The
implications of this Digital First phenomenon are vast for talent development
initiatives.



Personal branding has evolved tremendously over the last quarter century, with
the most significant changes emerging after the onset of the pandemic. It’s
time to take a look at your brand and personal brand action plan to make sure
you’re relevant in this new environment.



 _William Arruda is a_ _keynote speaker_ _, co-founder of_ _CareerBlast.TV_
_and co-creator of the_ _Personal Brand Power Audit_ _\- a complimentary quiz
that helps you measure the strength of personal brand._



