English Español







English Español



September 1, 2022





_Whistleblower alleged violations of financial laws_



 **CHICAGO** – The U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health
Administration found Wells Fargo violated the whistleblower protection
provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act for improperly terminating a Chicago
area-based senior manager in the company's commercial banking segment.



The San Francisco-based bank was ordered to pay the employee more than $22
million which includes back wages, interest, lost bonuses and benefits, front
pay and compensatory damages. The findings follow an investigation by OSHA's
Chicago Regional Office that was initiated after receiving a complaint from
the employee.



OSHA found Wells Fargo violated the whistleblower protection provisions of the
Sarbanes–Oxley Act when it terminated the senior manager who had repeatedly
voiced concerns to area managers and the corporate ethics line regarding
conduct they believed violated relevant financial laws, including wire fraud.
The manager expressed concerns that they were directed to falsify customer
information and alleged that management was engaged in price fixing and
interest rate collusion through exclusive dealing.



Even though the manager believed the conduct was illegal based on company-
required training, they were terminated in 2019. After initially failing to
provide a reason for the termination, Wells Fargo later alleged the manager
was terminated as part of a restructuring process. However, investigators
found the removal was not consistent with Wells Fargo's treatment of other
managers removed under the initiative. The employee filed a complaint with
OSHA, alleging retaliation under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.



"The evidence demonstrates Wells Fargo took retaliatory action against this
senior manager for repeatedly expressing concerns about financial management
they believed violated federal laws," said Assistant Secretary of Labor for
Occupational Safety and Health Doug Parker. "The Sarbanes-Oxley Act protects
employees from retaliation in these very circumstances and the Department of
Labor will not tolerate employers who violate the law and illegally terminate
workers that exercise their rights under the law."



Both parties have 30 days from the receipt of OSHA's findings to file
objections and request a hearing before an administrative law judge.



OSHA's Whistleblower Protection Program enforces the whistleblower provisions
of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and more than 20 whistleblower statutes. These
statutes protect employees from retaliation for reporting violations of
workplace safety and health, aviation safety, commercial motor carrier,
consumer product, environmental, financial reform, food safety, health
insurance reform, motor vehicle safety, nuclear, pipeline, public
transportation agency, railroad, maritime, securities, tax, criminal
antitrust, and anti-money laundering laws; as well as for engaging in other
related protected activities.



Learn more about whistleblower protections.



# # #





_**Editor's note:** The U.S. Department of Labor does not release names of
employees involved in whistleblower complaints._



 **Media Contacts:**



Scott Allen, 312-353-4727, allen.scott@dol.gov  
Rhonda Burke, 312-353-4807, burke.rhonda@dol.gov



Release Number: 22-1770-NAT





U.S. Department of Labor news materials are accessible at http://www.dol.gov.
The department's Reasonable Accommodation Resource Center converts
departmental information and documents into alternative formats, which include
Braille and large print. For alternative format requests, please contact the
department at (202) 693-7828 (voice) or (800) 877-8339 (federal relay).



Occupational Safety & Health Administration



200 Constitution Ave NW



Washington, DC 20210



 __800-321-6742 (OSHA)



TTY



www.OSHA.gov



Federal Government



Occupational Safety & Health



About This Site

