An official website of the United States government.



Here’s how you know



**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.



**The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.



Back



 **Key Topics**



Back



Back



Back





News Release



 **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of Labor today announced a settlement
with Wells Fargo and Company and Wells Fargo Bank and GreatBanc Trust Company
– a plan trustee – that recovers more than $131.8 million for the retirement
plan’s participants after a department investigation found that, from 2013
through 2018, the fund overpaid for company stock purchased for the plan.



Wells Fargo also agreed to pay a penalty of nearly $13.2 million as part of
the settlement. Wells Fargo and GreatBanc entered into the settlement without
admitting or denying the allegations made by the department.



The action follows an investigation by the department’s Employee Benefits
Security Administration that determined Wells Fargo and GreatBanc Trust
Company caused the 401(k) plan to pay between $1,033 and $1,090 per share for
Wells Fargo preferred stock. Specifically designed for the plan, the stock
converted to a set value of $1,000 in Wells Fargo common stock when allocated
to participants. In transactions between 2013 and 2018, the plan borrowed
money from Wells Fargo to purchase the preferred stock.



In addition to its discovery that Wells Fargo and GreatBanc caused the plan to
pay more for stock than it would be worth when deposited in participants’
accounts, EBSA investigators learned Wells Fargo used the dividends paid on
the preferred shares to defray its obligation to make contributions to the
401(k) plan, by using the dividends to repay the stock purchase loans. The
investigation revealed the transaction was designed to cause the 401(k) plan
to pay more for each share of stock than plan participants would ever receive.



“Our investigation found those responsible for Wells Fargo’s 401(k) plan paid
more than fair market value for employer stock and, by doing so, betrayed the
trust of the plan’s current and future retirees,” said Secretary of Labor
Marty Walsh. “Today’s settlement shows the Department of Labor will act when
we find retirement assets are misused and benefit plans suffer.”



Once Wells Fargo pays the settlement amount to the trust, the funds will be
allocated to current and former participants affected by these transactions.
Wells Fargo will redeem the remaining convertible preferred stock for common
stock and will stop using dividends from the convertible preferred shares to
repay the stock purchase loans.



In addition, GreatBanc will not act as a fiduciary to a public company in
connection with any future leveraged transaction involving an employee stock
ownership plan, unless the plan acquires only publicly traded stock and pays
no more than the fair market value.



“When plan fiduciaries’ actions violate participants and beneficiaries’ trust,
the Office of the Solicitor will take appropriate action,” said Solicitor of
Labor Seema Nanda. “This settlement reflects the Department of Labor’s resolve
to protect America’s workers’ hard-earned retirement savings and to ensure
that plan fiduciaries comply with their legal requirements.”



“The Employee Retirement Income Security Act requires, and participants’
retirement security demands, that when retirement plans purchase employer
stock, they pay no more than fair market value,” said Acting Assistant
Secretary for Employee Benefits Security Ali Khawar. “This settlement
demonstrates that the Employee Benefits Security Administration will not allow
participants to be harmed by ERISA plans that overpay for plan assets.”



Employers and workers can reach EBSA toll-free at 866-444-3272 for help with
problems related to private sector retirement and health plans. Learn more
about EBSA.



200 Constitution Ave NW  
Washington, DC 20210  
1-866-4-USA-DOL  
1-866-487-2365  
www.dol.gov



Connect With DOL

