FMCGs dominate a new top ten of corporations most criticized by activist
groups (NGOs) in Q2 this year, with Nestlé the most criticized brand by far.
NGOs see Nestlé, Johnson & Johnson, Unilever and Coca Cola as dragging their
heels on the plastic packaging issue, which has them making the latest ‘ten
most criticized firms’ ranking from NGO tracking and issues analysis
consultancy SIGWATCH. Other companies coming under fire include energy
companies and finance firms, a result of their continued allegiance to fossil
fuels.



Nestlé has topped the NGO most criticized rankings since the start of the
year. Last quarter it attracted more than double the amount of NGO disapproval
than the number two most reproached brand Johnson & Johnson. One NGO, Plastic
Soup Foundation, accuses Nestlé, Unilever (in 8th place) and Coca-Cola (9th)
of backing “false solutions” to plastics waste and calls out Coca Cola and
Nestlé as two of the top three contributors to marine plastic pollution.



“Two years ago, plastic pollution had barely registered on the public
consciousness. Today it is a major public concern, attracting consumer
attention, media column inches, and government legislation,” said Robert
Blood, founder and managing director of SIGWATCH.



“However, in the eyes of NGOs, corporates’ current efforts on plastics don’t
go far enough. In particular Greenpeace and its allies are disappointed that
big business is focusing on recycling rather than reduced use, and Nestlé is
being made an example of, to encourage the others to step up. NGOs are hoping
for a Domino Effect – spur one major brand into action and the others will
follow by default.”



Two Japanese banks, Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group and Mizuho Financial
Group, also find themselves on the most criticized list. They come under
attack for financing coal power, notably the controversial Van Phong 1 coal
power station in Vietnam. World Bank Group is the fifth most criticized brand,
accused of “quietly bankrolling” Indonesian coal mining companies, while Adani
Group is at number ten on account of its controversial Carmichael coalmine
project in Queensland, Australia.



In contrast, financial institutions that are rejecting fossil fuels are
rewarded with a place on the NGO ten most praised list. AXA, Allianz and QBE
Insurance Group are commended for taking steps to stop financing coal, in
particular for refusing to finance the Adani Carmichael coal project.



**About the quarterly rankings**



SIGWATCH has been compiling quarterly rankings of brands most praised and most
criticized by NGOs for three years. The latest rankings are based on its
monitoring of more than 9,000 NGOs and a total of 1,694 campaign actions over
the previous three months.



**COMPANIES MOST CRITICIZED BY ACTIVISTS IN Q2, 2019:**



 **1** Nestlé



 **2** Royal Dutch Shell



 **3** Johnson & Johnson



 **4** Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group



 **5** World Bank Group



 **6** Monsanto



 **7** Mizuho Financial Group



 **8** Unilever



 **9** Coca-Cola Company



 **10** Adani Group



 **COMPANIES MOST PRAISED BY ACTIVISTS IN Q2, 2019:**



 **1** Prada Group



 **2** Hilton



 **3** AXA



 **4** VF Corporation



 **5** Allianz



 **6** QBE Insurance Group



 **7** Chanel



 **8** Unilever



 **9** Burberry



 **10** Coach



 **About SIGWATCH**



SIGWATCH is a global research and strategy consultancy specializing in
understanding NGOs (activist groups) and the impact of their campaigns on
corporate reputation and social responsibility. It is headquartered in London,
United Kingdom with a support office in Germany and a global network of
researchers and analysts. It also has partners in the US and Canada.



SIGWATCH provides real-time monitoring and measurement of emerging stakeholder
risk from more than 9,000 NGO campaigners across all industry sectors. Its
clients are mostly global businesses that have direct or sector exposure to
issues campaigns, and companies that advise or invest in such businesses or
need to carry out due diligence prior to partnering or investment.



www.sigwatch.com





The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines



Topics covered: manufacturing, packaging, new products, R&D, and much more.

