Honda employees were not paid accurately as a result of a Kronos hack that
affected the company’s timekeeping and payroll, according to a class action
lawsuit filed Oct. 25 in South Carolina federal court.



Plaintiff Raneesha Jackson, a Honda employee, says Honda Development &
Manufacturing of America LLC utilizes Kronos for timekeeping and payroll
services.



In December 2021, Kronos payroll services were reportedly disrupted due to a
ransomware attack. This Kronos hack allegedly interfered with Honda’s ability
to track employees’ hours and pay them accurately.



In the wake of the Kronos hack, the plaintiff says Honda has failed to
accurately track the hours employees worked. Instead, the company uses various
methods to estimate employees’ work hours, the Honda class action lawsuit
alleges.



“As a result of Honda’s failure to accurately track their actual hours worked
each week, employees who were non-exempt and worked overtime were in many
cases paid less than the hours they worked in the workweek, including overtime
hours,” the Honda class action lawsuit states.



Jackson says she works more than 40 hours each workweek and is therefore
entitled to overtime pay under the **Fair Labor Standards Act** (FLSA).
However, she says, she has not been properly paid overtime for all of the
hours she worked in excess of 40 hours per week since the Kronos hack, in
violation of the FLSA.



Instead of calculating the actual number of hours non-exempt employees work,
Honda allegedly bases its calculation on an arbitrary estimate that does not
consider the actual number of hours worked. The Honda class action lawsuit
says that this inaccurate method of calculating work hours was intentional and
that many Honda employees have been underpaid as a result.



“In other words, Honda pushed the effects of the Kronos outage onto the backs
of its most economically vulnerable workers, making sure that it kept the
money it owed to those employees in its own pockets, rather than take steps to
make sure its employees were paid on time and in full for the work they did,”
Jackson alleges in the Honda class action lawsuit.



Kronos recently **agreed to pay $15 million** to settle a class action lawsuit
alleging its fingerprint time clocks violated Illinois privacy laws.



 ** _Have you been affected by the Kronos hack? Tell us about your experience
in the comments!_**



Jackson is represented by Joseph Sandefur and Andrew R. Frisch of Morgan &
Morgan PA and Matthew S. Parmet of Parmet PC.



The **Honda class action lawsuit** is _Raneesha Jackson v. Honda Development &
Manufacturing of America LLC_, Case No. 3:22-cv-03716-MGL, in the U.S.
District Court for the District of South Carolina, Columbia Division.



 **Check out our list ofClass Action Lawsuits and Class Action Settlements you
may qualify to join!**



 **Read About More Class Action Lawsuits & Class Action Settlements:**



Δ



Δ



Your email address will not be published. By submitting your comment and
contact information, you agree to receive marketing emails from Top Class
Actions regarding this and/or similar lawsuits or settlements, and/or to be
contacted by an attorney or law firm to discuss the details of your potential
case at no charge to you if you qualify. Required fields are marked *



Comment *



Name *



Email *







Δ



Δ



Please note: Top Class Actions is not a settlement administrator or law firm.
Top Class Actions is a legal news source that reports on class action
lawsuits, class action settlements, drug injury lawsuits and product liability
lawsuits. Top Class Actions does not process claims and we cannot advise you
on the status of any class action settlement claim. You must contact the
settlement administrator or your attorney for any updates regarding your claim
status, claim form or questions about when payments are expected to be mailed
out.



Δ



@2022 Top Class Actions. All Rights Reserved.  Privacy Policy  |  Terms and
Conditions

