Former SeaWorld trainer John Hargroves, who spent 20 years training orcas at
the popular park, is pulling the curtain back on the grim reality of what it
was really like at SeaWorld.



According to Hargroves, officials at the famous marine park established a
“Jurassic World” style of breeding that created aggressive hybrid killer
whales. However, the park had “no idea” what they were creating at the time.



Hargroves, who starred in the bombshell documentary _Black Fish_ , compared
the marine attraction to the fictional events in _Jurassic Park_. As he
describes, the park resorted to unconventional tactics to breed more orcas for
its live shows that attract millions of visitors to the park every year.



According to Hargroves, after the orcas were captured from the Pacific, they
were later bred with Icelandic killer whales. This irresponsible breeding
created whales that would never survive in the wild simply because they don’t
exist.



“It’s like Jurassic World. The whole premise of the movie is that they created
hybrid dinosaurs,” he said. “That’s exactly what we did at SeaWorld.”



He added: “The main takeaway with creating a hybrid orca is that you truly
have no idea what you’ve created because they don’t exist in nature. So all
things are possible.”



In addition, sadly, SeaWorld orcas were forced to mate with family members due
to poor planning. In 2007, a mother and son orca produced a calf. However,
it’s unclear whether the two were able to mate or whether the mother was
artificially inseminated.



Three years later, another SeaWorld orca gave birth to a calf after she mated
with her uncle. However, she instantly rejected the baby.



In 2016, California passed legislation that banned killer whale breeding in
captivity. After, SeaWorld announced that it would stop its breeding programs
across all three of its parks.



Sadly, breeding is still legal in countries like Japan and Russia, where
killer whales perform in live shows.



Before the law passed, Jon Reilly, then president of SeaWorld San Diego, said
that “a ban on breeding would sentence these animals to a slow extinction in
our care.” SeaWorld later announced it was going in a “new direction,” but
their remaining killer whales would stay at the park.



Since 1961, nearly 166 orcas have been held in captivity. According to Whales
and Dolphin Conservation, SeaWorld holds 18 of those whales in its three parks
across the country. Out of the 18 orcas at the park, six are hybrid whales and
are known to be aggressive.



One hybrid orca went on to kill its trainer, Alexis Martinez. Later, SeaWorld
officials sent another hybrid killer whale to a different park after it
grabbed a trainer by the leg. Most of SeaWorld’s orcas were bred in captivity
using the sperm of SeaWorld’s most famous orca Tilikum.



Join Our Community



Subscribe to our newsletter for new stories, tips & events.









© 2022 - Outsider - All rights reserved

