Copyright © HT Media Limited  
All rights reserved.



Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India (HMSI) has announced a voluntary recall in
India for three of their motorcycles. The motorcycles are CRF1100 Africa Twin,
CBR1000RR-R Fireblade and GL1800 Gold Wing Tour. Honda has identified that
there is an issue with the PGM-FI unit or the fuel injection unit. Because of
this, the engine can stall while riding. However, there are no cases of any
failures reported in India.



Also Read : Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India's sales grow by 7% in August
2022



So, BigWing dealerships of Honda will be flashing a software update to the
motorcycles that have been affected by the faulty fuel injection system. The
procedure should ideally take around 30 minutes to complete.



The dealerships will be contacting the customers through call, email or SMS
for an inspection of their motorcycle. Customers can also check if their
motorcycle is affected or not by entering their VIN or Vehicle Identification
Number on Honda BigWing's website.



A total of 84 motorcycles have been affected that have been manufactured
between 2020 to 2022. This will be a ‘free of cost’ procedure so it will be
done irrespective of the warranty status of the motorcycles. Honda will be
starting communicating with customers from 3rd September 2022.



Besides this, Honda recently launched the CB300F in the Indian market. It sits
below the CB300R. There is a lot of difference between both the motorcycles.
The CB300R is a neo-retro motorcycle whereas the CB300F is a naked
streetfighter.



Also Read : Honda CB300R vs CB300F: Price, specs, design and hardware
comparison



The CB300F gets a 293 cc, air-oil cooled unit that produces 24.2 hp and 25.6
Nm. On the other hand, the CB300R gets a 286 cc engine that produces 31.1 hp
and 27.5 Nm. Both the motorcycles come mated to a 6-speed gearbox with slip
and assist clutch. The CB300R is priced at ₹2.77 lakh (ex-showroom) and the
CB300F starts at ₹2.26 lakh (ex-showroom).



Copyright © 2022 HT Auto

