**The .gov means itâ€™s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.



 **The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.



 _The FDA has identified this as a Class I recall, the most serious type of
recall. Use of these devices may cause serious injuries or death._



Medtronic Cobalt/Crome Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators (ICDs) and
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Defibrillators (CRT-Ds) are implantable
cardiac devices that are intended to monitor and regulate heart rate and
rhythm. These devices can deliver a pacing impulse to correct a slow heartbeat
(bradycardia), provide biventricular pacing/cardiac resynchronization therapy,
or produce an electric shock (cardioversion or defibrillation) to restore a
regular heartbeat if a life-threatening arrhythmia occurs.



Medtronic is recalling Cobalt/Crome Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators
(ICDs) and Resynchronization Therapy Defibrillators (CRT-Ds) after receiving
reports of devices with a short circuit protection (SCP) alert resulting in
reduced-energy electric shock delivery, instead of delivering a second phase
of high voltage therapy.



A reduced-energy electrical shock may fail to correct an irregular heartbeat
(arrythmia) or may cause an irregular heartbeat. The harms associated with a
reduced-energy electric shock or an inaccurate response to an SCP alert may
cause serious injury or death.



There have been 27 complaints, no injuries, and no deaths associated with this
issue.



On June 22, 2022, Medtronic issued a communication to customers. The
communication offered the following patient management recommendations and
considerations to customers and/or users:



Customers with questions or concerns about this recall should contact
Medtronic Technical Services (1-800-723-4636) or their local Medtronic
representative.



Healthcare professionals and consumers may report adverse reactions or quality
problems they experienced using these devices to MedWatch: The FDA Safety
Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program using an online form, regular
mail, or FAX.



08/19/2022

