**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.



 **The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.



 _The FDA has identified this as a Class I recall, the most serious type of
recall. Use of these devices may cause serious injuries or death._



People who have Type 1 diabetes may use the MiniMed™ insulin pump to deliver
insulin for the management of their diabetes.



Medtronic is recalling the specified insulin pumps to replace any pump that
has a clear retainer ring with one that has the updated black retainer ring at
no charge. A replacement insulin pump will be provided even if the clear
retainer ring is not damaged and regardless of the warranty status of the
pump.



Medtronic previously identified, and informed customers about missing or
broken clear retainer ring of the MiniMed™ 630G and 670G insulin pumps. The
retainer ring helps to lock the insulin cartridge into place in the pump's
reservoir compartment. If the cartridge is not locked firmly into place, under
or over delivery of insulin may occur, which could result in low blood sugar
(hypoglycemia) or high blood sugar (hyperglycemia). Severe hyperglycemia and
hypoglycemia can be life-threatening or may result in death.



Serious injuries and deaths have been reported with the use of MiniMed™ 600
series insulin pumps, however those adverse events may not have been directly
related to the damaged clear retainer rings that are the basis for this
recall.



On October 5, 2021, Medtronic notified customers by email and phone that the
recall has been expanded to replace all MiniMed™ 600 series insulin pumps that
contain the clear retainer ring.



Medtronic provided the following updated recommendations to customers:



In November 2019, Medtronic first communicated about this recall with
instructions for customers to examine pumps for potential retainer ring damage
and to contact Medtronic if the retainer ring appeared to be loose, damaged or
missing.



Customers who have questions or need additional information or support about
this recall should call the 24-hour Medtronic Technical Support at
877-585-0166.



Health care professionals and consumers may report adverse reactions or
quality problems they experienced using these devices to MedWatch: The FDA
Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program either online, by
regular mail or by FAX.





10/05/2021

