An official website of the United States government



Here’s how you know



**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.



**The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.



We enforce federal competition and consumer protection laws that prevent
anticompetitive, deceptive, and unfair business practices.



View Enforcement



Find legal resources and guidance to understand your business responsibilities
and comply with the law.



Browse legal resources



View all Competition Matters Blog posts



We work to advance government policies that protect consumers and promote
competition.



View Policy



Find legal resources and guidance to understand your business responsibilities
and comply with the law.



Browse legal resources



Memo from Chair Lina M. Khan to commission staff and commissioners regarding
the vision and priorities for the FTC.



Learn more



View all Tech@FTC Blog posts



Learn more about your rights as a consumer and how to spot and avoid scams.
Find the resources you need to understand how consumer protection law impacts
your business.



Visit militaryconsumer.gov



Visit consumer.gov



Visit Competition Counts



Competition Guidance



View News and Events



View more Events



Sign up for the latest news





Spot the latest COVID scams, get compliance guidance, and stay up to date on
FTC actions during the pandemic.



Use our visualizations to explore scam and fraud trends in your state based on
reports from consumers like you.



Our mission is protecting consumers and competition by preventing
anticompetitive, deceptive, and unfair business practices through law
enforcement, advocacy, and education without unduly burdening legitimate
business activity.



Learn more about the FTC



Lina M. Khan was sworn in as Chair of the Federal Trade Commission on June 15,
2021.



Chair Lina M. Khan



Looking for legal documents or records? Search the Legal Library instead.



Looking for legal documents or records? Search the Legal Library instead.



Tags:



The Federal Trade Commission today sued Walmart for allowing its money
transfer services to be used by fraudsters, who fleeced consumers out of
hundreds of millions of dollars. In its lawsuit, the FTC alleges that for
years, the company turned a blind eye while scammers took advantage of its
failure to properly secure the money transfer services offered at Walmart
stores. The company did not properly train its employees, failed to warn
customers, and used procedures that allowed fraudsters to cash out at its
stores, according to the FTC’s complaint. The FTC is asking the court to order
Walmart to return money to consumers and to impose civil penalties for
Walmart’s violations.





“While scammers used its money transfer services to make off with cash,
Walmart looked the other way and pocketed millions in fees,” said Samuel
Levine, Director of the FTC’s Bureau of Consumer Protection. “Consumers have
lost hundreds of millions, and the Commission is holding Walmart accountable
for letting fraudsters fleece its customers.”





In addition to its retail business, Walmart offers financial services to
consumers in its stores, including money transfers, credit cards, reloadable
debit cards, check cashing, bill payments and more. Walmart acts as an agent
for multiple money transfer services, including MoneyGram, Ria and Western
Union, offering some services under its own brand, like “Walmart2Walmart” and
“Walmart2World.” According to the complaint, tens of millions of money
transfers are sent or received at Walmart stores each year, where they are
processed by Walmart employees.





Money transfers are services that people use to send money to a recipient in
another location. They are frequently used by fraudsters across a wide variety
of scams because they are nearly impossible to retrieve after the money has
been picked up. The FTC has brought multiple cases against money transfer
services in recent years, including against MoneyGram and Western Union,
alleging they failed to protect consumers who used their services.





Walmart’s practice of turning a blind eye to fraud had grave consequences for
consumers, according to the complaint. The complaint cites numerous instances
in which law enforcement investigations found that scammers relied on Walmart
money transfers as a primary way to receive payments, including in
telemarketing schemes like IRS impersonation schemes, relative-in-need
“grandparent” scams, sweepstakes scams, and others. Based on information from
fraud databases maintained by MoneyGram, Western Union, and Ria, from 2013 to
2018 more than $197 million in payments that were the subject of fraud
complaints were sent or received at Walmart, with more than $1.3 billion in
related payments also possibly connected to the fraud.





The FTC’s investigation of Walmart’s money transfer practices showed,
according to the complaint, that Walmart knew about the role money transfer
services play in scams and frauds. Despite that, the company’s money transfer
services harmed consumers in numerous ways, including:

















The Commission vote to file the civil penalty complaint was 3-2, with
Commissioners Noah Joshua Phillips and Christine S. Wilson dissenting. The FTC
filed the complaint in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Illinois.



The Federal Trade Commission works to promote competition and protect and
educate consumers. Learn more about consumer topics at consumer.ftc.gov, or
report fraud, scams, and bad business practices at ReportFraud.ftc.gov. Follow
the FTC on social media, read consumer alerts and the business blog, and sign
up to get the latest FTC news and alerts.



Blog: FTC says Walmart allowed fraud involving money transfers





Before You Wire Money



Blog: FTC alleges fraudsters used Walmart’s money transfer services to bilk
consumers – while Walmart looked the other way

