



Follow Us



Epaper



Login / Register





A -



A +



**Updated At:** __Jul 29, 2022 11:50 AM (IST)



In this image from video posted to Instagram, a performer dressed as the
character Rosita waves off Brown's daughter and another six-year-old Black
girl at the Sesame Place amusement park in Langhorne.





****



**Philadelphia, July 29**



A Baltimore family is suing a Sesame Street-themed amusement park for $25
million over claims of racial discrimination, alleging multiple costumed
characters ignored a five-year-old Black girl during a meet-and-greet event
last month.



The lawsuit comes in the wake of a video, shared widely on social media,
showing two other Black girls apparently being snubbed by a costumed employee
during a parade at the park in Langhorne, outside Philadelphia. Sesame Place
apologized in a statement and promised more training for its employees after
the video went viral earlier this month.



A post shared by Jeezy (@__jodiii__)





The suit, which seeks class action status, was filed in a federal court in
Philadelphia against SeaWorld Parks, the owner of the Sesame Place, for
“pervasive and appalling race discrimination.”



The lawsuit alleges four employees dressed as Sesame Street characters ignored
Quinton Burns, his daughter Kennedi Burns and other Black guests during the
meet-and-greet on June 18. The lawsuit says “SeaWorld’s performers readily
engaged with numerous similarly situated white customers.”



During a press conference held Wednesday, one of the family’s attorneys,
Malcolm Ruff, called for transparency from SeaWorld and for the company to
compensate the Burns family. The suit was filed in the US District Court for
the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. AP



A -



A +



SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTER





Jail sources say Jain has gained 8 kg while in jail, contrar...



Police have asserted that Poonawala has confessed to his cri...



Lalringsanga (54) was arrested on November 21 from Aizawl in...



Deuba secures 25,534 votes against his nearest rival Sagar D...



View All



































































The Tribune, now published from Chandigarh, started publication on February 2,
1881, in Lahore (now in Pakistan). It was started by Sardar Dyal Singh
Majithia, a public-spirited philanthropist, and is run by a trust comprising
four eminent persons as trustees.



The Tribune, the largest selling English daily in North India, publishes news
and views without any bias or prejudice of any kind. Restraint and moderation,
rather than agitational language and partisanship, are the hallmarks of the
paper. It is an independent newspaper in the real sense of the term.



The Tribune has two sister publications, Punjabi Tribune (in Punjabi) and
Dainik Tribune (in Hindi).



Remembering Sardar Dyal Singh Majithia



Designed and Developed by: Grazitti Interactive

