Walmart let go of almost 200 corporate employees on Wednesday amid the
economic downturn and rising inflation, according to a person familiar with
the development. The company said in a statement that these layoffs are a part
of updating its structure. Last month, the firm slashed its Q2 and yearly
profit guidance and said people are spending less on items like electronics
due to inflation.



The retail giant employs over 1.6 million people across its stores and supply
chain in the U.S — those workers were not affected by these layoffs. A report
from Bloomberg noted that job cuts affected people in merchandising and last-
mile delivery.



“We’re updating our structure and evolving select roles to provide clarity and
better position the company for a strong future. At the same time, we’re
further investing in key areas like e-commerce, technology, health and
wellness, supply chain, and advertising sales and creating new roles to
support our growing number of services for our customers, suppliers, and the
business community,” a Walmart spokesperson said in a statement.



While the company said it’s creating new roles in e-commerce and technology,
it didn’t specify how many roles will be created.



The rising inflation has also affected other retail giants like Target and
Best Buy with both cutting down profit targets in the past few months. In its
June earnings result, Amazon revealed that it cut its global workforce by
nearly 100,000 people accounting for an almost a 6% reduction.



Walmart’s layoff news comes just before the government is set to release data
about job creation for July. Analysts estimate that the data will show an
addition of 250,000 non-farm payroll jobs last month, lower than 372,000 jobs
added in June.



Big Tech cutting back on hiring is an opportunity for startups





Robinhood lays off 23% of staff, CEO Vlad Tenev says, ‘This is on me’



