An official website of the United States government



Here’s how you know



**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.



**The site is secure.**  
The **https://** ensures that you are connecting to the official website and
that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.



We enforce federal competition and consumer protection laws that prevent
anticompetitive, deceptive, and unfair business practices.



View Enforcement



Find legal resources and guidance to understand your business responsibilities
and comply with the law.



Browse legal resources



View all Competition Matters Blog posts



We work to advance government policies that protect consumers and promote
competition.



View Policy



Find legal resources and guidance to understand your business responsibilities
and comply with the law.



Browse legal resources



Memo from Chair Lina M. Khan to commission staff and commissioners regarding
the vision and priorities for the FTC.



Learn more



View all Tech@FTC Blog posts



Learn more about your rights as a consumer and how to spot and avoid scams.
Find the resources you need to understand how consumer protection law impacts
your business.



Visit militaryconsumer.gov



Visit consumer.gov



Visit Competition Counts



Competition Guidance



View News and Events



View more Events



Sign up for the latest news





Spot the latest COVID scams, get compliance guidance, and stay up to date on
FTC actions during the pandemic.



Use our visualizations to explore scam and fraud trends in your state based on
reports from consumers like you.



Our mission is protecting consumers and competition by preventing
anticompetitive, deceptive, and unfair business practices through law
enforcement, advocacy, and education without unduly burdening legitimate
business activity.



Learn more about the FTC



Lina M. Khan was sworn in as Chair of the Federal Trade Commission on June 15,
2021.



Chair Lina M. Khan



Looking for legal documents or records? Search the Legal Library instead.



Looking for legal documents or records? Search the Legal Library instead.



Tags:



The Federal Trade Commission used its Penalty Offense Authority today to take
action against national retailers Kohl’s, Inc. and Walmart, Inc. for falsely
marketing dozens of rayon textile products as bamboo. Both companies also are
charged with making deceptive environmental claims, touting that the “bamboo”
textiles were made using ecofriendly processes, while in reality converting
bamboo into rayon requires the use of toxic chemicals and results in hazardous
pollutants.



The Commission has asked the court to order Kohl’s and Walmart to stop making
deceptive green claims or using other misleading advertising, and pay
penalties of $2.5 million and $3 million, respectively, by far the largest
penalties in this area. The complaints and proposed orders were filed by the
U.S. Department of Justice on the FTC’s behalf.



“Kohl’s and Walmart are paying millions of dollars under the FTC’s Penalty
Offense Authority for mislabeling their rayon products as bamboo,” said Samuel
Levine, Director of the FTC’s Bureau of Consumer Protection. “False
environmental claims harm both consumers and honest businesses, and companies
that greenwash can expect to pay a price.”



The FTC’s complaints against Kohl’s and Walmart are similar in their structure
and allegations. According to the complaints, since at least January 2015,
Kohl’s, headquartered in Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin, and Walmart, based in
Bentonville, Arkansas, have each marketed at least two dozen items as made of
bamboo in both product titles and descriptions. In addition, the companies
have marketed some of the “bamboo-derived” products as providing general
environment benefits, such as being produced “free of harmful chemicals, using
clean, non-toxic materials.”



As the complaints allege, Kohl’s and Walmart’s supposed “bamboo” textiles are
actually made of rayon derived from bamboo, which was not disclosed to
consumers, in violation of the FTC Act and the Textile Act and Rules. Further,
the complaints allege the claimed environmental benefits of the products are
false and misleading because the rayon manufacturing process uses toxic
chemicals and results in the emission of hazardous pollutants.



 ** _Enforcement Action_**



The proposed orders settling the FTC’s complaints against Kohl’s **** and
Walmart prohibit the companies from conduct alleged in the complaint. The
companies must:



The FTC’s Penalty Offense Authority enables the agency to seek civil penalties
provided that: 1) the company knew the conduct was unfair or deceptive in
violation of the FTC Act; and 2) the FTC had already issued a written decision
that such conduct is unfair or deceptive. Over the last six months, the
Commission has revived this authority and expanded it to address false
earnings claims, false job placement claims, and deceptive reviews.



In conjunction with this announcement, the FTC is reviving additional Notices
of Penalty Offenses that were issued in the 1970s or 1980s but remain valid
and relevant today. These notices cover, for example, textiles, energy
savings, fur products, home improvement products, auto rentals, bait and
switch, toys, and weight reduction. Businesses in these industries should
familiarize themselves with the Commission’s determinations in these areas.



The Commission vote to authorize the staff to refer the complaints to the DOJ
and to approve the proposed orders was 4-0. The DOJ filed the complaints and
proposed orders on behalf of the Commission in U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia.



 **NOTE:** The Commission authorizes the filing of a complaint when it has
“reason to believe” that the named defendants are violating or are about to
violate the law and it appears to the Commission that a proceeding is in the
public interest. Consent orders have the force of law when approved and signed
by the District Court judge.



The Federal Trade Commission works to promote competition and protect and
educate consumers. Learn more about consumer topics at consumer.ftc.gov, or
report fraud, scams, and bad business practices at ReportFraud.ftc.gov. Follow
the FTC on social media, read consumer alerts and the business blog, and sign
up to get the latest FTC news and alerts.



Blog: FTC says Kohl’s and Walmart bamboozled customers



Green Marketing Claims



Blog: $5.5 million total FTC settlements with Kohl’s and Walmart challenge
“bamboo” and eco claims, shed light on Penalty Offense enforcement



Environmental Marketing



Clothing and Textiles

