Sign in



This article was published more than **2 years ago**



The family of a Walmart employee who fatally shot himself in 2019 hours after
buying a gun from the store has **** sued the retail giant for negligence,
alleging those at the store knew the man’s history of mental illness and
recent threats of suicide yet proceeded with the sale.



The family of 23-year-old Jacob Mace alleges a series of breakdown in policies
and violations of state gun sale laws that could have prevented his death,
according to a lawsuit filed in Tuesday in Prince George’s County, Md. Among
them were failures by store employees to ask screening questions before the
sale and to refuse the sale despite allegedly noticing Mace had been drinking
when he bought the gun during a morning break.



“That’s one of the sadder things about this case — there are multiple points
like that,” attorney Kevin Sullivan told The Washington Post on Thursday. “Had
an opportunity been taken to stop this [sale], the outcome would have been
different. The most specific is the actual handing over of the firearm, but
there were numerous balls that were dropped.”



Shootings never stopped during the pandemic: 2020 was the deadliest gun
violence year in decades



Walmart declined to comment, citing ongoing litigation, but offered
condolences to Mace’s family.



“We are heartbroken when we lose a member of our Walmart family and our
thoughts continue to go out to family and loved ones of Jacob Mace,” Walmart
spokesman Randy Hargrove said in a statement to The Post. “We are committed to
being a responsible firearms dealer and take these allegations seriously.”



The lawsuit comes as families and policymakers are still grappling with the
firearms death toll from 2020, which was America’s deadliest year for gun
violence in almost two decades. At least 43,551 people died of gun violence
last year, according to the most recent data from the Gun Violence Archive.
More than half of those deaths were gun suicides.



In the United States, more than half of all suicides are by firearms. Compared
to other methods that do not as consistently result in death, 85 to 95 percent
of all suicidal incidents result in death when a gun is used, according to
Michael D. Anestis, who researches firearms, suicide and public safety at
Rutgers University and is executive director of The New Jersey Gun Violence
Research Center.



“The typical story of American suicide is a gun that’s already been in the
home,” Anestis added. And someone will become suicidal down the road and it’s
there, the gun is in the environment.”



Mace was married with two young boys. His family had already once taken away a
gun he owned before he purchased another shotgun from Walmart, according to
the lawsuit.



Sullivan, a Maryland-based attorney who partnered with the nonprofit Brady
Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence in the case, said their lawsuit is not about
the Second Amendment but rather public health.



“This is not a case that is seeking to stop gun sales,” he said. “It’s a case
that’s seeking to stop illegal and an irresponsible gun ownership, and that’s
something gun owners and non-gun owners can agree on.”



Walmart, site of recent shootings, has a complicated history with guns



Walmart’s history with gun sales is a complicated one. As the world’s largest
retailer, it’s also considered the biggest seller of firearms and ammunition.
Over the past 25 years, the company has retreated from gun sales in certain
markets only to resume them in response to both industry and political trends.



Major gun retailers like Walmart can play a significant role in affecting gun-
sale policies across the industry, said Erin C. Davis, a lawyer with Brady who
is co-counsel in Mace’s lawsuit.



“Policies and procedures implemented by a big company can set the tone for
smaller companies. It can have a ripple effect and change lives,” Davis said.
“Nationally, gun dealers have an obligation to act with reasonable care.”



It was the standard of “reasonable care” that Walmart failed to meet, the
lawsuit claims.



‘I know I don’t need it.’ An AR-15 owner explains the allure.



Mace began working part-time in maintenance at the Walmart store in St. Mary’s
County, Md., in 2018. His family said Mace struggled with depression and
suicidal thoughts since childhood, but was formally diagnosed with major
depressive disorders and borderline personality disorders in June 2019 while
working for Walmart.



The lawsuit claims Mace had been open with his health struggles with
colleagues and even his supervisor, who was allegedly aware that a mental
health crisis was behind a hospitalization stint that forced Mace to miss
work, according to the lawsuit.



Mace was allegedly in the midst of an acute mental health crisis in the days
before his death, texting a colleague about “crippling” depression and
revealing he had tried to kill himself that week and would try again with a
gun. The colleague shared the text with Mace’s supervisor and suggested Mace
be added to the store’s discretionary “blacklist,” which it can use to deny
gun sales to people even if they aren’t barred under state and federal law.
The suit alleges Mace was never added to the store’s blacklist.



Three days before his death, Mace messaged a colleague who worked in firearm
sales asking what kinds of shotguns Walmart sold and which was “cheapest,”
according to the lawsuit.



Roughly two and a half hours into his morning shift on Nov. 15, 2019, Mace
purchased a shotgun during his break. Store colleagues noticed Mace appeared
to have been drinking, but sold him the gun after he passed background checks.
The lawsuit alleges employees did not ask Mace basic screening questions about
his state of mind or what he wanted the gun for.



When Mace never returned from his break, friends and family called 911 to look
for him. He was found little more than two hours after the timestamp on his
receipt, inside his truck parked in a nearby lot, the lawsuit says. He died of
a single gunshot wound.



Anestis said the realities of suicide prevention make assigning
responsibilities to specific individuals difficult.



“If people who are trained to do this struggle to do it effectively, it’s
tough to go to people who are outside the field of mental health and expect
them to do it,” he said.



Anestis stressed that suicide is complex but preventable.



“There were several people who did things right,” he said. “There was the
family who knew [Mace] was having a hard time and took that firearm away. And
the friend he texted told someone. And that shows how difficult it is in a
moment of crisis for someone to get help.”



 _If you or someone you know needs help, call the National Suicide Prevention
Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255). You can also text a crisis counselor by
messaging the Crisis Text Line at 741741._



 **Read more:**



A California wildfire killed two people. It started as an attempt to cover up
a murder, officials say.



In Whitmer kidnapping plot, extremists also wanted to blow up a bridge, feds
say



GOP lawmaker asked whether vaccines have ‘tracking devices.’ He insists he was
trying to debunk ‘wild’ claims.

