Current and former participants in a 401(k) plan run by SWBG LLC, a successor
to SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment Inc., have alleged a series of ERISA
violations in a lawsuit against the plan's fiduciaries.



"This case is another example of a large plan filling its 401(k) plan with
expensive funds when identical, cheaper funds were available," said the
complaint filed Aug. 10 in a U.S. District Court in San Diego.



The plaintiffs, who are seeking class action status, are former employees of
SeaWorld San Diego. They alleged that plan executives overpaid service
providers even though the plan "had more than sufficient bargaining power to
demand low-cost administrative and investment management services and well-
performing, low-cost investment funds."



The plaintiffs accused plan executives of "failing to engage in a competitive
bidding process by submitting a request for proposal to multiple service
providers including record keepers, shareholder services and financial
advisers," the lawsuit said.



They argued that plan executives "imprudently" chose and retained expensive
funds that "consistently failed to meet or exceed industry benchmarks or had
sufficient history to be offered in the plan," according to Coppel et al. vs.
SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment et al.



The complaint noted that Sea World Parks & Entertainment is the former sponsor
and that SWBG LLC, also a defendant, is the current sponsor. SWBG LLC is a
subsidiary of SeaWorld Entertainment, Inc., a theme park and entertainment
company based in Orlando, Fla. The parent company is not a defendant.



The SWBG LLC 401(k) Plan, Orlando, Fla., formerly known as the SeaWorld Parks
& Entertainment 401(k) Plan, had assets of $309.6 million as of Dec. 31, 2019,
according to the lawsuit.



A SeaWorld representative did not respond to a request for comment.



Sign up and get the best of News delivered straight to your email inbox, free
of charge. Choose your news â€“ we will deliver.



Get access to the news, research and analysis of events affecting the
retirement and institutional money management businesses from a worldwide
network of reporters and editors.



Our Mission



To consistently deliver news, research and analysis to the executives who
manage the flow of funds in the institutional investment market.



Main Office  
685 Third Avenue  
Tenth Floor  
New York, NY 10017-4036



Chicago Office  
130 E. Randolph St.  
Suite 3200  
Chicago, IL 60601



Contact Us



Careers at Crain



About Pensions & Investments



