(Jan. 18, 2022)



Walmart employees who filed a lawsuit saying they weren’t paid by the retailer
for mandatory temperature checks must go back to the drawing board after a
California judge threw out most of their class action claims.



On Jan. 14, U.S. District Judge Nathanael M. Cousins filed an order partially
granting Walmart’s motion to dismiss wage theft claims filed against it by
Plaintiffs Salvador Guzman and James Marshall.



The plaintiffs, both Walmart employees, alleged that the retailer failed to
pay its workers wages for time spent undergoing COVID-19 related temperature
checks before work.



They also claimed they weren’t paid their meal period premiums correctly and
were not provided accurate wage statements, which is in violation of state and
federal labor laws.



However, the judge sided with Walmart on most of the claims, agreeing that the
plaintiffs had not given sufficient evidence to stand up their allegations.



“Walmart argues that Plaintiffs’ first three causes of action should be
dismissed for failure to state a claim,” the judge wrote. “The Court agrees
because the three causes of action generally allege labor code violations
without offering any specifics about Plaintiffs’ experience.”



The judge pointed to the allegations made by the plaintiffs that they were
underpaid their meal period premiums.



“Plaintiffs do not identify a single date when either of them was paid a meal
period premium at an incorrect rate,” the judge stated. The workers also claim
they were not paid overtime correctly; however, the judge says no dates were
noted by the plaintiffs.



Judge Cousins tossed allegations under **California’s Unfair Competition Law**
, finding the complaint fails to allege that Guzman and Marshall lack an
adequate legal remedy.



He said Guzman and Marshall have until Feb. 14 to file an amended complaint.



In February last year, Walmart was **hit with another class action lawsuit**
from employees who claimed the retail giant made them arrive at work at least
30 minutes early for COVID-19 screenings that they weren’t paid for.



 ** _Have you been asked to do COVID-19 screenings at work that you weren’t
paid for? Let us know your experience in the comments._**



Guzman and Marshall are represented by Larry W. Lee and Mai Tulyathan of
Diversity Law Group PC.



The **Walmart Temperature Check Class Action Lawsuit** is _Salvador Guzman et
al. v. Walmart Inc. et al._ , Case No. 5:21-cv-09133, in the U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of California.



 **Check out our list ofClass Action Lawsuits and Class Action Settlements you
may qualify to join!**



 **Read About More Class Action Lawsuits & Class Action Settlements:**



Δ



Δ



Add me please. We were never compinsated for the time.



Add me



Add



Add Me



Add me



I workedst Sam’s warehouse owned by Walmart and no we were not paid for
temperature checks and morning screening which were done every shift until
March 30 2022



Your email address will not be published. By submitting your comment and
contact information, you agree to receive marketing emails from Top Class
Actions regarding this and/or similar lawsuits or settlements, and/or to be
contacted by an attorney or law firm to discuss the details of your potential
case at no charge to you if you qualify. Required fields are marked *



Comment *



Name *



Email *







Δ



Δ



Please note: Top Class Actions is not a settlement administrator or law firm.
Top Class Actions is a legal news source that reports on class action
lawsuits, class action settlements, drug injury lawsuits and product liability
lawsuits. Top Class Actions does not process claims and we cannot advise you
on the status of any class action settlement claim. You must contact the
settlement administrator or your attorney for any updates regarding your claim
status, claim form or questions about when payments are expected to be mailed
out.



Δ



@2022 Top Class Actions. All Rights Reserved.  Privacy Policy  |  Terms and
Conditions

