Please see what other class action settlements you might qualify to claim cash
from in our  Open Settlements  directory!





![Walmart-sales-
tax](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%202000%201489'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Walmart-
sales-tax](https://s40123.pcdn.co/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Walmart-sales-
tax.jpg.optimal.jpg)



**UPDATE 2:**



 **UPDATE:**



 **Walmart** has agreed to pay $5 million to resolve class action lawsuit
claims that it failed to refund sales tax to customers.



The settlement benefits consumers who returned an item purchased at Walmart or
Sam’s Club between July 17, 2015, and Nov. 25, 2020, and who were not given a
full refund including the sales tax they paid on the original purchase.



Plaintiff Scott Pearlstone filed his **Walmart sales tax class action
lawsuit** in December 2017, arguing the retail giant violated Missouri law by
failing to include sales tax in consumer refunds.



Walmart’s return policy reportedly allows consumers to return items within 90
days of purchase. Depending on whether consumers have a receipt, they can
receive this refund in store credit or through the original payment method.



Despite the terms of this refund policy, Walmart and Sam’s Club allegedly fail
to include sales tax payments when they issue refunds to consumers.



Walmart has not admitted any wrongdoing but has agreed to resolve the claims
against it with **a $5 million settlement deal**.



Under the settlement, Class Members can collect a cash payment, though exact
payment estimates are not currently available. Final payment amounts will
depend on the number of claims filed and the net settlement fund after the
deduction of attorneys’ fees, costs and other expenses.



In order to benefit from the settlement, Class Members must file a valid claim
form by April 1, 2021. Proof of purchase is not required with these claims.



The deadline for exclusion and objection is April 1, 2021. The final approval
hearing for the Walmart sales tax class action lawsuit is April 21, 2021.



Consumers who returned an item purchased at Walmart or Sam’s Club between July
17, 2015, and Nov. 25, 2020, and who were not given a full refund including
the sales tax they paid on the original purchase.



 **Cash payments.**



Exact payment estimates are not currently available. Final payment amounts
will depend on the number of claims filed and the net settlement fund after
the deduction of attorneys’ fees, costs and other expenses.



N/A



CLICK HERE TO FILE A CLAIM »



**NOTE:** If you do not qualify for this settlement do NOT file a claim.



Remember: you are submitting your claim _under penalty of perjury_. You are
also harming other eligible Class Members by submitting a fraudulent claim. If
you’re unsure if you qualify, please read the FAQ section of the Settlement
Administrator’s website to ensure you meet all standards (Top Class Actions is
not a Settlement Administrator). If you don’t qualify for this settlement,
check out our database of other **open class action settlements** you may be
eligible for.



04/01/2021



 _Scott Pearlstone v. Wal-Mart Stores Inc._ , Case No. 4:17-cv-02856-HEA, in
the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri



04/21/2021



www.WalmartRefundClassAction.com



Walmart Sales Tax Refund Settlement Administrator  
c/o Epiq  
P.O. Box 2995  
Portland, OR 97208-2995  
1-800-462-2905



Myles McGuire  
Paul T. Geske  
Brendan Duffner  
MCGUIRE LAW PC



Naomi Beer  
Francis Citera  
GREENBERG TRAURIG LLP



Matthew Turner  
ARMSTRONG TEASDALE LLP



 **Read About More Class Action Lawsuits & Class Action Settlements:**



Δ



Δ



Those post so old it’s from last year Wtf



10/01/2021 Received $8.51 check in Missouri.



You must reply to the email they send or you won’t receive your payment. They
let you chose how you want to be paid. I got mine yesterday via PayPal.



I received no email



Received email for digital payment to paypal for $8.51 today in Texas.



I got an email too it’s weird did you get a check



I received $8.51 on 7/23/21 in IL. Thanks TCA :)



Has anyone gotten pay pal payment



Received payment Louisiana 7/27/2021.



received digital payment in NY 7/27 10pm



So these checks are only for 8 dollars and 51 cent



Did receive $8.51 in State of Montana today.



Received $8.51 in MA. today.



Found my info regarding digital payment options in my spam folder.



Received check for $8.51 in NY yesterday.



Confirmed my payment but have not received my payment even though it says
payments went out on the 19th and 22nd. What’s going on?



The electronic payment is going to take a week so people should be getting
them no later than the 29th



I complied with payment method and still haven’t received anything yet!



8.51 in Calif



Got mine $8.51 today. In Oklahoma



8.51 n TN 7/23/21



Got mine .8.51 in Wisconsin



Received a check for $8.51 in MI today



Received a confirmation number but never received Virtual Master Card… Also
was wondering how much I would receive?



Received a check in SC for $8.51



Well must be a set fig for each state, I, too am in SC and my check was $8.51
as well. Hmmm. Biden math?



Dummy



No experiments on me…….



Might be but I will find out soon. informed delivery via USPS is showing me
receiving 2 separate checks in the mail today



I have had this happen recently with Informed Delivery showing two pieces of
the same mail and it ended up only being one.



Melissa, I’d like to buy you a virtual drink. Well done!



I just got a email yesterday asking for payment method but haven’t received
anything yet



I just entered for payment then they said the website was down  
When I went back it said my information was already redeemed  
What message does it say after you verify? Idk what I should do now anybody
knows anything that would help a lot  
Thank you



Same here!



Alrighty hopefully comes in soon if I get something I’ll be sure to let you
know!  
gracias!??



So there are 3 different anoints people have said they received. Does anyone
know the correct amount???



So there are 3 different amounts people have said they received. Does anyone
know the correct amount???



I see 4 different amounts, who knows!



It’s only $8.51 people. Checks are already out!



Yess then it said expect payment within a week.



Right



I just got an email asking for my paypal account selection and payment is
coming soon!



I just got an email as well



I got an email today also. Any clue on how much we should expect.



the payment is $1.83



how do you know?



I got $97.00



Bull!! Prove it



The check I received today was for $8.51.



Got 8.61 in Wisconsin



Me to. I got the same email. But it didn’t say how much.



I selected PayPal also but mine said if I selected PayPal or Venmo I would get
my payment instantly but I didn’t I’ll wait a few days and if not then I’ll
contact them



I just got an email for a refund from this settlement, I had a choice of
prepaid MasterCard, PayPal, or Venmo. Filled it out and it said I would get
the payment in approx. one week. Just a heads up to keep an eye out.



I received a check today. $223.56



No you didn’t. They did not send checks yet



They were mailed July 19th.



I got check coming based on mu uses up



They might be telling truth as website states that checks were mailed the 19th



Still waiting for the funds from (“Pearlstone v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.”) as of
June 16,2021.



I have not received any money for this class action as of yet



It’s been my experience that funds are usually sent out 6 months after final
approval



Today is June 14th. Has anyone received a check yet? I have not.



Recently, I have encountered other problems with Walmart’s refund and return
policy and am curious if others have had similar situations. Most recently,
when ordering for online pickup today, my order was never fulfilled so I
cancelled it but was never refunded the money. Walmart’s refund policy says
5-10 business days. I’m way beyond that and for items never even received.
This has happened many times in the past where they never fulfil the order
then they wait 10days before cancelling it then another 10 days before
refunding. This time I cancelled it myself to avoid any further delays in
returning my money.



TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN , MY NAME IS STEVEN DEAN SETTLEMENT CLAIM NUMBER
CLOTIGJQ MY ADDRESS IS 30 TURNER AVE. CRANSTON, RHODE ISLAND 02920 WHEN WILL I
RECEIVE A SETTLEMENT CHECK  
SINCERELY STEVEN DEAN



??‍♀️ WE’VE BEEN TRYING TO REACH YOU IN REGARDS TO YOUR EXTENDED CAR WARRANTY
?



When will we start to receive settlement checks



When will the checks be mailed out? An for how much .



add me



Has anyone got a check and if you did for how much



Has anyone received a check yet



Has anyone received their check yet? If yes, how much was it?



Did anyone receive a email if they opted for a check because I didn’t but I
filed the claim in January



Please add me.



Add me



Please add me



add me please



Include me



Please Add Me



Add me please.



Add me



Costco does this too. We bought a tv in a city 20 minutes away with a higher
tax rate because ours was sold out. The tv was damaged so we called our local
Costco and they said it was ok to return they. They didn’t give us the full
refund. I argued with them and since our membership was coming due I demanded
they give us the rest of the refund by offsetting our membership fee. After
back and forth with manager we were able to do so. But the following month we
tried to use our membership and it said it expired and that was another whole
argument that finally got corrected. Thanks to Fetch for keeping copies of my
scanned receipts.



Add me



PLEAS ADD ME



Add me



Please add me



Add me



Please add me.



yup, me too! thank you!



Add me please



Please add my name



Add me



Please add me…



Add me



I made returns doing the period of time !!



Please add me



Please add me



Add me please.



Please add me.



Yes, add me. Just another thing to worry about during, and because of
covid-19!



Please add me



Please include me.



Add me



Please add me.



Please add me.



Please add me



Add me



Add me



add me



Yes please add me I have returned items to Walmart



I live in the state of Massachusetts and Walmart never includes receipts with
their online orders. The majority of orders I purchase are with Marketplace
vendors and Taxes are not shown. I have made plenty of returns and never seen
a tax indication.



I’ve been shopping here for years and have returned and exchanged items



Add me Thank You



Add me please



Please add me



I too have been a Walmart shopper and have returned items at least 30 + years  
Please add me in!!  
Thanks ??



Please add me



FYI: There is an option to use to file a claim if you are eligible. They are
not automatically adding anyone by saying “please add me”.



please add me have returned at Sams club and Walmarts many times with in the
last 30 yrs



Please add me



Please add me. Have returned at Walmart and Sam’s



Surely I qualify I have shopped/returned items at wall-mart 35 + years. Add me
please & thank you.



Please add me.



Add me please



Please add me, I have been Walmart customers for many years and have bought
items that I returned or exchanged.



Add me please



Please add me



Add me please



i have exchanged with walmart for 20 yrs and exchanged or received a gift card
please include me thanks



Please add me as I have returned items to Walmart for years.



Please add me



i was a walmart employee when i resided in long island ny moved from ny too
newark, de. need to know how to put in change of address if ever to recieve
any funds from class action settlements



this is my new address  
2 Atram Hall  
Newark,De.19711



Please add me. I qualify



please add me. I have been buying and returning items to Walmart for over 20
years now. I always asked why do you NOT refund the tax paid on the item. of
course they had no answer for me.



Please add me



I’ve returned a lot of items to walmart over the past few years. They always
make a big deal out of it and not return tax.



Add me



Please add me,



Please add me as I have returned items to Walmart for years.



please include me



Add me I shop and return things all the time from both dams and Walmart.



Please add me. I’ve returned alot of things to walmart.



Please add me



Please add me



I have been a customer with Walmart for many years and continue to purchase
from the store. I think this is worth looking into since I made purchases from
the timeframe presented in the opening regarding Walmart.



Please add me, Vicki



ADD ME



Please had me,i didn’t really notice it till I not long ago. I had to return a
microwave that stop working after 4 months. Exchanged it for same exact
microwave but had to pay more than before.



please add me



Please add me. I’ve made many returns to Walmart



Walmart has been doing this fir years to people and it’s just now fessin up……
I’ve returned plenty of things to Walmart I have a puzzle right now I want to
go to take back. But I haven’t Kept all of the receipts throughout these years



Please Add me.



Please add me.



Do you file a claim or do I ask to be added to this list of people for
representation?



I have returned several and am not sure if I received taxes



please add me



Add please



Add me please



add me, i’ve returned many items and have never gotten sales tax back at
Walmart



Add me please



Add me please.



Can you please add me to this. I’ve returned at both of these stores.



Add me to this please



I never recall ever getting tax back and I have returned more then $5,000
since 2015



Add me



Add me



Please add me



Add me please



Add me please



add me as well. Especially on purchases from over seas you don’t get
reimbursed the full with the taxes



Add me



Add me



Add me



add me



add me please



Add Me !



Yes, I’ve returned several things to Walmart and Sams club and always
questioned why I didn’t get a full refund, and only the amount paid for the
item. Please add me.



I have returned items on our sam’s card add me



Please include me.



Add me



we have been going to walmart for food and misc. items and have returned
several items we do have some receipts  
please add us ( my wife and me )



Add Me



Add me.



add me



I return several items to Walmart with receipts and with my Walmart credit
card and almost never get the tax back when I purchased the item from an
online 3rd party seller from walmart.com. nowhere does the site state that
returning an item entitled the store to keep my money !



Add me please, I returned some items



Please assist me in filing a claim.



Thanks



Add Me



ADD ME



You have to start a claim



PLEASE ADD ME



Add me



I have made returns, I don’t remember everything that I have returned, & more
than likely, I I threw the receipts away because I hate keeping paper junk.



add me



add me



Add me



I just took some Christmas gifts back last month.



Please add me



Please add me



Add me Thanks



Add Me too



Add me to the list, Oakland ca, Henderson NV & Tulsa ok all three states I
have lived I have shopped at Walmart



you have to add yourself. commenting “add me” does nothing for anyone. its
just a comment and no one reads it lol you have to actually file a claim



No doubt! Pure ignorance



I know. PEOPLE LISTEN!!! YOU HAVE TO SUBMIT A CLAIM. NOT SAY ADD ME!!! NO ONE
IS GOING TO ADD YOU, DUH



I shop Walmart frequently add me



Just curious if by replying with “Add me” if that works? Do you get added?



You have to click on the submit a claim.  
Fill  
Out the two questions and then enter your info. You do not get added my just
commenting!



Add me



Please add me, I have been a Walmart shopper for years always doing returns.



please add me



please add me we shop there a lot including groceries



add me



Add me



Add me



Please add me



Add me! I doing a lot of my shopping groceries and household items at Walmart!  
I live in PA!  
Thanks!



Always shop there add me.



Add me please



Add me



Over charged and never got a refund  
Add me



Whenever I do return to Walmart or Sam’s Club I kind of have an idea about the
amount and I make sure on the receipt it says tax refund amount because I used
to work there and I seen that a problem times when you bring this kind of
issue to the management they don’t even care



It’s happened to me. I shop in Walmarts in both PA & NY. If I bought something
in NY and return to PA, they always screw up the return tax on me. Please
include me, thanks.



Plz add me !



Add me



Add me please I’m always at walmart do many reasons



please add me



Add me



Add me



please add my name



WalMart is always making “mistakes” in THEIR favor. Add me.



Please add me. I shop at Walmart weekly and definitely have returned many
items during that time period.



Add me



Add me please



I’d like to be added but I live in Arkansas. It was the same way here. Which I
complained about on several occasions.  
Not sure if where I live is a issue or not.. Thanks



Please add me



Please add me. I shop and return merchandise at both Walmart and Sams all the
time.



Reply



Add me please



Add me



I purchased and returned items from Sams Club that were not needed for our
business. There must be records somewhere. Please include me.



add me



please add me



Add me



Please add me



Add me please



Please add me. I shop and return merchandise at both Walmart and Sams all the
time.



Add me please



Please add me



I frequently shopped at Walmart and returned many items over the years.



add me



Add me



Add me



Please add me.



add me



I would like to be added please.



Please add me



PLS ADD ME IN



Please add me



Shopped and returned items.



please add me



Add



add me



I need to be added.



Please add me.



Add me



Please add me



Add me



I have shopped at both



Please add me



Shop both . Please add



Shop both. Please add me.



Add me please



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me



Add me please



Please add me



Please add me



Add me



Please add me.



Add me please



Please add me



I have already filed and uploaded receipts. Waiting on final outcome.



I have a Walmart card and have returned items  
Please add me to the list



Please add me.



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me



Pls add me….thank you…



Add me



Please add me



Please add me



Please add my name and e-mail. Thanks



Please add me



Add me please I have purchase and return records shorted on multiple
happenings



Add me



Please add me



Add me please



Add me please



Add me please



This happens to me also. Sad that Walmart can’t follow the law.



Add me & my daughter



Add me to the list



add me too



Add me. Prior to the recent changes and the receipt lookup system, I often got
shortchanged, especially if I returned in a different local with lesser sales
tax than the local sales taxes I paid when I bought the item.



Please add me



Please add me returned several item on different times I asked why they didn’t
return tax’s



please add me



I know assurian walmarts new warranty services (when you purchase extra
coverage) does not give any sales tax on your refund. They give you the dollar
amount only. Their previous warranty company gave you sales tax as a part of
your refund. Someone should look into that.



I may be wrong it may have been assurian that was their original warranty
service. There is 2. But the new one don’t give you a full refund with sales
tax like their last one.



Add me please



Yup, returned a bunch of curtains and a few candles.



Please add me



Add please



Please add



I have always trusted sams and Walmart! Why would I think to check a return
receipt to make sure I was paid the right price for a return!  
Please add me to the class action suit!



Is this just in Missouri because we have a few receipts from walmart with the
same problem we live in idaho



Please add me



Please add me.



Why in the world would someone have to submit a “claim” for this? The
defendants have very good records of receipts, and should have to prove that
all their refunds included the proper amounts. If any receipts are wrong, they
are all suspect. Discovery should have a field day with this.



I have been a member at sams clubs for over 20 years and shop Walmart all the
time. I have returned goods but never checked the receipt because I trusted
them. Please add me to the list



I have returned items from both Walmart and Sam’s. I never noticed the refund
amount and trusted them. Please add me.



Add me please



Add me



Please add me to this list.



Add me please



please add me I have been a member for years at sams and I shop at Walmarts
all the time



Please add me.



Please add me



please add me



add me please



Add me to the Class Action Lawsuit. I shop at both Walmart and have had Sam’s
Club membership for way more than 10 years.



Please add me



I have been a member of Sams for 20+ years and returned a lot of different
items. Same with Walmart.  
Please add me to the suit



I go to both always



Please add me



Add me please.



Add me please



Add me



Please include me.



please add me



Please include me



please add me



Definitely add me. Who knows how much $$ I’ve not been reimbursed for.



Please add me. I



Pls add me



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me



Add me please



Please add



Please add me! I’ve returned items at Walmart quite often!



I definitely have returned to both of these stores. Unfortunately would have
never known.



Add Me!



add me please



add me



add me



Please add me



bought something on the website. when it was not delivered a refund was issues
and upon checking it was not the full price refunded.



Please add me because I just took something back last week and  
I don’t really pay attention afterwards.



Please add me



walmart always refunded sales tax. no problems here.



please add me



Please add me been to Tennessee store many times and many returns



these lazy asss women with their ADD me comments. Lol



Stop writing “ADD ME!” This is only a comment section.  
YOU MUST FILL OUT THE PAPERWORK BY TOUCHING THE LINKS THEY PROVIDE! Or you
will not be apart of ANY lawsuits.  
Be Blessed



dumb sheep. citizens of walmart lol



Add Me Please



Add me. I guess I need to start paying attention better



Add me



Please add me Wal-Mart customer



Please add me, thank you.



add me please i shop at walmart all the time and have returned stuff alot.. i
always questioned them on that.. never getting a answer either



Always a shopper at Walmart.



Please add me



Add me Walmart my store on a weekly basis



Wow, Walmart was my go-to store because I am not well off. They always take
advantage of needy people.



Add me



Add me



Please add me



Please add me



Please add y



I want to file a claim.



Please add me.



Please add me.



Please add me to list, I returned some items back, 2 times they gave me a
Walmart gift card, no sale tax extra on it. Just thought it was add automatic.



please add me.



Add me please



Plz add me



lease add me



Please add me



add me please



Is this just for the State of Missouri?



What if you are unsure if you were given the sales tax or not? I don’t really
check receipts that close and throw them away if there are not anything major
on them.



Just file anyway



Please add me



I hv never seen so many dumb ass people on this site. No one can add you. u hv
2 fill out the claim form 4 yourself like everyone else. If u don’t know how 2
use the site please refrain from using it—-PERIOD!!!!!!



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me.



Add me. I even argued with the associate about this a few times.



Please add me.



Please add me.



Addr



Add me too



add me



Add me please



Please add me



please add me



Please add me.



Please add me not sure if I did it right I know the items which should be able
to be looked up on my account that I returned



I’ve had this happen also at WALMART!!



What if you return jewelry and you got the return money for the jewelry but
not the taxes and the money for the extended warranty. I brought over a
$1200.00 wroth of jewelry and when I return it the next day only got money
back for the jewelry. I don’t have the receipt but did buy it about 4 or 5
months ago.



How do you file the claim if you no longer have the return receipt?



Add the give me the exact amount the item is for minus the taxes



add me this happens a lot



Please add me, but I think I may have already applied for this one!



please add me I have returned many items



Add me please. This happened to me.



Add me



Add me, have this happen to me Sam,s club and walmart



Please add me



add me



add me



Add me



Add me.



please add me



Please add me



Add me



Please add me



Add me, I do more Walmart than i do Sam .



Please add me return countless times.



I don’t use Sam but I do use wall-mart a lot to purchase and returns



Add me – have had this happen several times



Please add me..purchase from.walmart and have returned items numerous times..



I’ve return several things back to Walmart and I didn’t receive cash but A
gift card not for the amount of my purchase



Add me



Please add me



Add me



add me



add me



Please add me to this lawsuit



Add me



Who doesn’t shop at Wal-Mart? A staple. Please add me!



Add me



Add Me



add me please



Add me please



I’ve been a member of Sams for years and have returned items as well as
shopping at Walmart for decades and have returned a lot of different items.
Please add me to the suit.



Add me please



Please add me



Add me please



Add me please.



add please



Add me please



Leslie Chestang  
Please add me



Please add me



Add me



Please add me.



Add Me



Add me



Add me please



Please add me. Thank you



Add me..  
Stopped shopping there due to this!



Add me please



Add me, please



add me



add me



Add me



add me



Add me



Please add me to it



add me



add me



add me



add me



Add me



Your email address will not be published. By submitting your comment and
contact information, you agree to receive marketing emails from Top Class
Actions regarding this and/or similar lawsuits or settlements, and/or to be
contacted by an attorney or law firm to discuss the details of your potential
case at no charge to you if you qualify. Required fields are marked *



Comment *



Name *



Email *







Δ



Δ



Please note: Top Class Actions is not a settlement administrator or law firm.
Top Class Actions is a legal news source that reports on class action
lawsuits, class action settlements, drug injury lawsuits and product liability
lawsuits. Top Class Actions does not process claims and we cannot advise you
on the status of any class action settlement claim. You must contact the
settlement administrator or your attorney for any updates regarding your claim
status, claim form or questions about when payments are expected to be mailed
out.



Δ



@2022 Top Class Actions. All Rights Reserved.  Privacy Policy  |  Terms and
Conditions

