



So many consumers were irked about allegedly being shorted precious coffee by
Folgers that the courts decided to consolidate the cases.



Folger Coffee Co., its parent J.M. Smucker Co., and retail giant Walmart were
all accused in lawsuits of falsely advertising the number of servings in
ground coffee canisters, and therefore overcharging customers. A total of nine
lawsuits were filed across California, Florida, Illinois, and Missouri about
the canister capacity.



Now, just one case will be argued in a Missouri court, **Law360 reported**.



The move had to go through the Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation,
which agreed to consolidate five of the class action lawsuits and four
possible tag-along lawsuits. All the cases carried similar claims of
misrepresentation, breach of warranty, unjust enrichment, and violation of
state consumer protection laws. Folgers, Smucker, and Walmart did not oppose
centralizing the case but insisted on Missouri over California as the venue.



The lead plaintiff behind the Florida class action, Marcia Sorin, **accused
Folgers** of “unlawful, unfair, and deceptive business practices” because the
company promises a certain number of cups of coffee can be brewed from a
package, when in reality “the can contents cannot produce anywhere near the
number of cups represented,” her class action lawsuit claims.



Sorin says that Folgers Classic Roast, which states on the front label that it
makes up to 380 six-ounce cups, only makes about 265 to 275 six-fluid-ounce
servings — even when following the directions on the label.



Sorin’s lawsuit alleges several other Folgers products’ serving sizes don’t
add up — including Folgers Special Roast Medium, Folgers ½ Caff Medium,
Folgers Coffeehouse Blend Med-Dark, and Folgers Breakfast Blend Mild, which
all claim to produce 210 six-ounce coffee servings while only producing about
150 to 160 servings according to Sorin.



Similarly, **lead plaintiff in the Illinois lawsuit** Ellen Moser says she
purchased a 30.5 oz. container of Folgers Classic Roast from Walmart, which is
advertised to make 240 cups of coffee, but was left disappointed when the
container made much less, the lawsuit alleges.



Folgers went on the defensive in November, according to Law360, and urged the
Florida courts to dismiss Sorin’s proposed class action. The company
challenged the testing undertaken by Sorin’s “expert chemist,” and said a
label suggestion did not equate to instructions on how to drink coffee.



 ** _Have you purchased Folgers coffee and feel you didn’t get your money’s
worth? We’d like to hear from you. Tell us your story in the comments
below._**



Moser is represented by Katrina Carroll, Kyle Shamberg, Todd D. Carpenter and
Scott G. Braden of Carlson Lynch LLP. Sorin is represented by Emily Cornelia
Komlossy of Komlossy Law PA, Beth A. Keller of Beth A. Keller PC and Laurence
D. Paskowitz and Roy L. Jacobs of Paskowitz Law Firm PC.



Folgers and Smucker are represented by Ronald Y. Rothstein, Sean H. Suber and
Cristina Isabel Calvar of Winston & Strawn LLP.



The **Folgers Coffee Class Action Lawsuit** is _IN RE: Folgers Coffee
Marketing and Sales Practices Litigation_ , Case No. 2984, in the U.S.
District Court for the District of Missouri.



 **Check out our list of** **Class Action Lawsuits** **and** **Class Action
Settlements** **you may qualify to join!**



 **Read About More Class Action Lawsuits & Class Action Settlements:**



Δ



Δ



Add me



I was just talking about this! I was talking about coffee creamer not coming
up short for me. But, I was just saying saying that coffee comes up short for
me! Yes! Folgers comes up short for me! Please, keep me advised on this! A cup
is 8 oz! Or, 240 ml! That’s a tried and true measurement!



Please add me I am 77 years old and have used this coffee for years.



Please add me I just purchase some Monday



This is my family favorite coffee only 2 coffee drinkers in the family and yes
the container is empty within 2 weeks



I just bought 7 canisters for my ladies craft club!!!  
Are you kidding me!!! Love my folgers coffee……



Please add me



Folgers has been a staple in our house since I was a kid. My daddy used to
complain about not getting enough in the container and I see it too.



Please add me.



Add me. please



I love this coffee,add me



Yes please add me. My son and I love coffee but don’t like being mislead or
cheated. Thank you



Please add me to the list I buy Folgers coffee a lot for my husband



Add me



Add me



Add me, I purchase it regularly for myself and my brother, this is the
exclusive coffee that he drinks!



Please add me I have been drinking Folgers Classic Roast for many years.



I buy folgers.. coffee of choice.. please add me



Add me



Me and my husband have been drinking followed you since we’ve been together
for over 20 years



My husband have been drinking followed you since we’ve been together for over
20 years



Add me please Folgers is all I drink



Please add me



Add me



this is very sad as a consumer



please add me



Add me



Add me



Add me



I’ve drank Folgers since I was in my 20’s now I’m in my fifties and I’ve
always said the same thing add me



Add me



Folgers is the brand I have purchased and of course from great ole Walmart for
several years go figure they would find a way to rip someone off on something.  
For once why can’t a big company be honest..  
I buy at least 3 cans a month wow



Yes. Please add me.



Add me



Add me please



Add me. I haven’t personally measured it, but I buy large amounts of Folgers,
so am definitely curious as to the findings.



Please add me buy folgers all the time



I have a cabinet full as of right now. Please add me



Have bought 1/2 cafe for years for my husband and he has always said don’t
listen to the directions because it doesn’t make a good pot of coffee. Add me,
too.



I have been drinking Folger sent I was 8 years old; Can I get some of my money
back! Sign me up.



long time drinker of folgers. please add me.



we have been drinking folgers along time, I guess we have been cheated for a
long time, so sad this world is becoming all about the money. please add me



Please add me



please add me



Please add me



Add me please



I have purchased Walmart and Sam’s club multiple times over the years. I may
not have proof purchases



Add me please



Add me



Add me please



Add me please



Add me please



Add me please



Add me please



Please add me



Add me



Add me please



Please add me to the Folgers lawsuit.



add me



Have bought Folgers for years, my grandson and I drink it every morning  
Add me please



Add me



add me



add me please



Add Me



I was a Folgers person for years . Please add me



Folgers was the only couple I would purchase until recently.Please add



I comparison shop depending on the number of cups. Bought Folgers for 40
years. Please add me.



Please add my name to the list. I have been drinking Folgers since I was a kid
and still drinking it.



I have purchased Folgers for many years please add me to this I do qualify



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me



Add me please



Add me please



Add me please



Please add me to the class action



WE BUY THE FOLGERS COFFEE ALL THE TIME! PLEASE ADD ME



Please add me.



I have purchased Folgers Coffee Breakfast Blend in South Carolina BUT I moved
to Missouri in November 2019 and have purchased here in Missouri since 11/2019
until the present (April 2021). Please add me.



add me please



Add me to the list



Please add me



Walmart and Folgers both lost my trust this day. i thought i was getting a
full can of Folgers Coffee i want what i pay for.



Add me



Add me please



please add. This is the only coffees I drink. It’s a shame canisters are never
full.



Everytime I buy Folger’s  
Never full!! Why is that??? Not going to pay so much money for half of A large
canister!! Please Stop Ripping people off!!  
I had to go back to Walmart to return half of unopened canister shook it and
said, you hear that, HALF EMPTY!!



Add me please



I have always complained about it not being full add me please



Pls add me



Please add me



Purchased many large cans of Maxwell House and Folfers Decaf



My family drinks this coffee



Please add me



Please add me



Folgers is my go to. It deffently seemed like contents is getting less. Count
me in



Add me please



I have bought alot of folgers and yuban coffee. It seems like the containers
are getting smaller and smaller but it says they still make the same amout.



Please add me



Please add me



Please add me, we buy this all the time.



Please add me



add me. we use product all the time



I have beem buying the huge cans for almost all my life .If u can total 4
carafes of coffee everyday from home and at work all yr round 7 days a week.
They should be giving a lot more ..but will take it. I sincerely deserve it.



I drink this coffee add me



My son drinks this coffee. Please add us.



Add me



Please add me



Include me



add me also please



add me please



Add me please



Ad me



Add me please



Please add me



Add me please



please add me



I use Folgers all the time. With COVID, I kept a better eye on what I was
using. I knew that the count was off! Please add me!



Ad me



Folgers from Walmart has been our buy for quite a while now



Our coffee of choice is Folger, pure Colombian coffee, which says 210 cups per
container. I highly doubt that it is providing that cup amount per container
(this is the large container, which has gotten shorter over time) You actually
pay more now for Folger coffee than ever before. Please add me to this suit.
Thank you



Add me please



Please add me.



Add me



How about soldiers from my son is coming over every weekend never had a chance
to measure to see if I’m getting the cups that I need but I need to be added
to that lawsuit because I spend my money for their coffee.



It has been like this since I started drinking coffee I’m 43 and I started
when I was 18.



Add me



I’ve been feeling like that for awhile niw



I feel like I was wronged as well



Add me



Add me



Bought folgers canister is filled to top !!!



I knew that they were living. I buy this brand all the time for over 20 years.
I would say they owe me a nice sum of a refund.  
Add me to this class action suit  
Please.



Add me, please



They never add up to the cup serving, all packages our deceptive with false
jnfo. Please add me to suit ty



I buy Folgers black Silk coffee in the big and small canisters for my fiance
ALL the time and have been for the last 7 years. He is an avid coffee drinker
and prefers Folgers over any other brand of coffee. However, it seems as if
the cans arent near as full as they used to be and has progressively gotten
even shorter as the years have passed. With that being said, could you please
add me or contact me at jiggygirl2562001@gmail.com so that I can be apart of
this claim? Thanks so much and have a blessed day!:)



I finally switched to Maxwell House. I live on a fixed-income and couldn’t
afford it due to the smaller amount of cups it produced.



I buy Folgers all the time .I dont use anything else. Please add me



Add me



Add me



please add me on, I buy this coffee every week for the last 4 to 5 years



Add me I thought I was going crazy I followed direction and coffee would not
last long and I’m buying coffee twice a month



Add me



We buy this every week and it is smaller package. Less and less  
Please add me to lidt



Add me



Add me please



I have been buying my coffee from there for years.



Saying “add me” isn’t how you join Any of these class actions. I don’t
understand why SO many on here think it is.



Was wondering the same thing.



Add me



Please ad me. I’ve drank this brand for years.



add me in please



My thought was the folgers company officials must drink their coffee really
weak…



It always seemes to run out faster than it did years ago…



I use the same measurements like I always have….



WE BUY THE 30.5oz FOLGERS COFFEE ALL THE TIME! PLEASE ADD ME



Please add me been buying Folgers for years



Add me please



Add me please



Yes. Please add me in.



Please add my name



Foldgers is the main brand I buy. I go threw 2 of these containers every
month. I would like to be added to the suite please.



Your email address will not be published. By submitting your comment and
contact information, you agree to receive marketing emails from Top Class
Actions regarding this and/or similar lawsuits or settlements, and/or to be
contacted by an attorney or law firm to discuss the details of your potential
case at no charge to you if you qualify. Required fields are marked *



Comment *



Name *



Email *







Δ



Δ



Please note: Top Class Actions is not a settlement administrator or law firm.
Top Class Actions is a legal news source that reports on class action
lawsuits, class action settlements, drug injury lawsuits and product liability
lawsuits. Top Class Actions does not process claims and we cannot advise you
on the status of any class action settlement claim. You must contact the
settlement administrator or your attorney for any updates regarding your claim
status, claim form or questions about when payments are expected to be mailed
out.



Δ



@2022 Top Class Actions. All Rights Reserved.  Privacy Policy  |  Terms and
Conditions

