This page is about personal injury lawsuits against Walmart. Our lawyers look
at settlement compensation payouts in Walmart injury cases, what you can
expect if you have an accident claim against this retailer, and how to
increase the settlement amount you receive for your case.



Everyone knows Walmart. It is the world's largest company by revenue in 2021
and the largest non-governmental employer. It is the most frequently sued
private personal injury claims defendant in the United States.







![Owings Mills Maryland Walmart](photos/walmart_store_1.jpg)Walmart gets sued
nearly 20 times a day, close to 5,000 lawsuits each year. Many of these
lawsuits have been brought by Walmart's employees, bringing employment
discrimination and wage and hour claims, mostly involving overtime.



Our law firm handles **only** serious injury and wrongful death personal
injury cases. This article is about personal injury tort claims against
Walmart. Most typically, they are slip and fall or other premises liability
cases, truck accidents, negligent security, or pharmacy malpractice cases.



Can you sue Walmart if you are a customer and suffered an injury as the result
of their negligence? Most likely, you can. How do you sue Walmart or convince
them to settle? You best best path is to hire the best lawyer that you can.



Why a Walmart specific page? Walmart is a big defendant. There are some
aspects about suing Walmart and fighting this company in court that are
different from dealing with other companies. It does not reflect any
particular animosity our lawyers have towards Walmart.



A quick survey of our law firm shows almost all of our lawyers and paralegals
shop there. You cannot avoid Walmart and Amazon in 2021. But it is the rare
big large company that is even-handed when it comes to claims and litigation.
Walmart plays hardball from the incident report to appeal of your verdict.



Walmart has a reputation in accident claims for being particularly aggressive.
In some ways, the company is like its shoppers. Walmart wants to get the best
deal that it can. But, in this case, Walmart getting the best deal means not
giving the victims that it hurts and kills by its negligence reasonable
compensation for the harm it causes. That is not justice.



How does Walmart handle claims against it? They fight them.



How does that work? Walmart has set up a subsidiary called Claims Management,
Inc. act as its own third-party insurance adjuster. Claims Management manages,
values, and tracks Walmart accident claims. It does all of the legwork on
processing claims, getting information from the victims, trying to get
recorded statements, and so forth.



You will feel like you are dealing with a separate company that might give you
the feeling that you are dealing with a third party who might treat you more
fairly. Ultimately, you are dealing with Walmart.



Walmart has good lawyers. Any big settlement with Walmart will have the
tightest confidentiality clause you have ever seen. So Walmart keeps the
lion's share of the settlement compensation payouts it makes under tight
wraps.



![Owings Mills Maryland Walmart](photos/walmart_store_2.jpg)Generally
speaking, it is easier to fight against a large corporation than it is to
fight an insurance company. Why? Because insurance companies often have in-
house counsel -- paid attorney employees -- to challenge their claims.



Even big companies need to hire lawyers. This makes settling claims before a
lawsuit is filed more advantageous. Big companies often do not want to have
their reputations besmirched by being the subject of many lawsuits. The
corporate image also acts as an incentive to settle cases more quickly.



Walmart seemingly cares little about these things. It acts a lot like an
insurance company. It does not fear its reputation will be tarnished by
litigation (unless maybe someone really famous is involved). It is not
particularly concerned about legal fees.



The one way Walmart's policy in injury cases is different from an insurance
company is that it fights harder. The company aggressively challenges personal
injury lawsuits even when it makes economic sense to settle the claim. This is
probably to discourage the filing of lawsuits. But it has not worked.



But win or lose, this retail giant desperately wants to make plaintiffs'
lawyers feel like they have been in a fight. Getting documents from them in
litigation is always World War III. Walmart has been sanctioned by judges
around the country for not producing documents and frustrating legitimate
fact-finding by the plaintiffs' attorneys.



Can Walmart be beaten in an accident claim? Absolutely. The deciding factor in
most lawsuits against Walmart or any other defendant in this country is the
facts. The side that should win usually does win.



That is the good news. The bad news that in the average settlement on a
Walmart claim is that you are going to have to fight to get what you deserve.
Most Walmart settlement offers will be for far less than fair value. Getting
fairly compensated is likely going to require that you retain a personal
injury lawyer.







![Owings Mills Maryland Walmart](photos/walmart_store_3.jpg)Below are
summaries of some successful verdicts and settlements around the country. We
did not pull these at random, so please do not think these are a
representative sampling or that they can tell you by themselves the value of
your or your client's case, even if you have similar facts.



Where are the big Walmart settlements as opposed to verdicts? Walmart has good
lawyers. Any big settlement with Walmart will have the tightest
confidentiality clause you have ever seen?



Our lawyers handle Walmart serious injury and wrongful death personal injury
claims. **Our focus is on serious injury and wrongful death claims. We do not
handle smaller cases. (** If the injuries are not very serious, you can always
fill out a contact form and we will forward it to a lawyer handling these
cases in your area, if we know one).



We are lawyers who sue Walmart. If you have been injured as a result of the
negligence of this company, we may be able to help you. You can get a free
Internet consultation. If we think you have a claim, we will call you to
discuss your legal rights and options.



Walmart Settlements Payouts | Serious Injury & Death Cases Only



This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of
Service apply.



Please do not include any confidential or sensitive information in a contact
form, text message, or voicemail. The contact form sends information by non-
encrypted email, which is not secure. Submitting a contact form, sending a
text message, making a phone call, or leaving a voicemail does not create an
attorney-client relationship.

