Credit: DaytonDailyNews



Most of the counts brought by John Crawford III’s parents against Walmart in a
civil lawsuit survived summary judgment and will proceed to trial, a federal
judge ruled today.



Crawford, 22, of Fairfield, was shot twice and killed Aug. 5 2014, by a
Beavercreek police officer in that city’s Walmart. The trial had been
scheduled to begin next week, but Beavercreek appealed and the trial was
delayed until Oct. 28.



Crawford was holding a Crosman MK-177 BB/pellet rifle he found unpackaged on a
store shelf. A lone 911 caller, Ronald Ritchie, told dispatchers a black man
was holding a rifle, appeared to be loading it and waving it near people,
including children.



 **RELATED:Beavercreek appeals ruling in deadly Walmart shooting**



Beavercreek officer Sean Williams and Sgt. David Darkow responded to Walmart,
and Williams fired twice within seconds of seeing Crawford after officers said
they shouted out commands. Crawford was on his cell phone talking to the
mother of his two children.





U.S. District Court Judge Walter Rice ruled that the wrongful death count
against Walmart be dismissed. But the judge also ruled in a 38-page opinion
filed today that trial against Walmart will continue on claims of negligence,
premises liability, survivorship and loss of consortium.



Credit: DaytonDailyNews



“In the court’s view, based on the evidence presented, a reasonable jury could
find that Wal-Mart breached its duty to take reasonable precautions to protect
its customers from foreseeable dangers,” Rice wrote. “Although Wal-Mart was
not required by law to secure the MK-177 pellet rifles, a reasonable jury
could find that it should have done so.”



 **RELATED:Judge rules most of Crawford suit against Beavercreek can go to
trial**



Rice also found it reasonable that a jury could rule Walmart had a duty to
return the item to its package and that Walmart took too much time to warn
Crawford that carrying such an item was dangerous after four employees knew
about it.



The judge also ruled a reasonable jury could find negligence on Walmart’s part
because it knew the MK-177 could be confused with an AR-15 style firearm
regardless of the warning on the box or Ohio’s open-carry laws.



Rice noted that the MK-177 box, which was redesigned to take out staples and
be easy to open, includes a warning that states, “DO NOT BRANDISH OR DISPLAY
THIS AIRGUN IN PUBLIC - IT MAY CONFUSE PEOPLE AND MAY BE A CRIME. POLICE AND
OTHERS MAY THINK IT IS A FIREARM.”



 **RELATED:Judge to decide if Walmart, Beavercreek go to trial in John
Crawford III’s death**



Rice also wrote that a Walmart employee saw Crawford and was concerned that
someone may mistake the pellet rifle for a real firearm. That employee called
another worker for management to be notified so they could locate Crawford.



Rice wrote that two Walmart managers walked together but did not find him. One
manager testified that because she did not believe that Crawford posed any
immediate danger, she did not treat this as an urgent situation.



Rice cited case law that as a “business invitee,” Crawford was owed by Walmart
a duty to use care not to injure him by negligent activities; a duty to warn
him of latent dangers known; and a duty to inspect the premises to discover
dangerous conditions and take reasonable precautions to protect him from
foreseeable dangers.



 **RELATED:Crawford attorneys say Beavercreek experts implicate officer in
shooting**



Rice wrote that in its motion for summary judgment, Walmart argued that
because plaintiffs contend Williams’ conduct was “criminal in nature,
plaintiffs must be held to a higher standard to prove Walmart had a duty to
protect Crawford from the criminal act of a third party.



Rice wrote that Walmart’s own retail expert admitted it had a duty to do a
risk assessment of pellet rifles and take action to protect customers and that
the MK-177 looks like a real rifle.



The expert “found that Wal-Mart did conduct such an assessment and concluded
that there was no risk to displaying an unsecured pellet rifle on the shelf,”
Rice wrote, quoting testimony.



 **RELATED:Officer who fired fatal shots thought Crawford “was about to” point
a weapon at him**



Walmart argued it was not foreseeable that in an open-carry state a police
officer would shoot and kill a customer carrying a pellet rifle and that a 911
caller would falsely report Crawford was loading the rifle and pointing it at
people, Rice wrote.



Rice also wrote that two months before Crawford was shot, Walmart got an email
from a Walmart customer in Minnesota who was concerned about “a very big
safety issue” about unsecured display of air rifles and ammunition.



The judge recounted the email that alleged two young boys loaded an air rifle
and pointed it the customer. The man who emailed asked that air rifles be
secured in the same manner as real firearms.



 **RELATED:Officer: Shooting Crawford without giving him time to respond was
OK**



Rice ruled that Walmart had a duty “to take reasonable precautions to protect
its business invitees from the dangers associated with the unsecured display
of MK-177 pellet rifles.”



Rice sustained Walmart’s request for summary judgment for a wrongful death
because “although Wal-Mart’s alleged negligence may have created the situation
that led to Crawford’s death, Wal-Mart’s alleged ‘provocation’ is simply too
attenuated to support a wrongful death claim under Ohio law.”



A Greene County special grand jury in 2014 cleared Williams of any criminal
charges. A federal civil right investigation against Beavercreek police was
closed in 2017 when it was determined they did not have enough evidence to go
forward.



 **RELATED:Beavercreek officer who shot John Crawford III back on ‘full
duty’**



Shopper Angela Williams died of a heart condition after she tried to run out
of the Walmart that night after the officer’s shots. Her family did not take
any legal action.



Attorneys for Crawford’s family and Walmart will be contacted for comment. We
will update this story if and when they respond.



 **RELATED:Williams used force nearly 10 times the department average**



 **RELATED:Feds won’t charge Beavercreek officer in Walmart shooting**



 ** **RELATED:Prosecutor said case was ‘tragic’ and ‘perfect storm of
circumstances’****



 **MORE:Read other stories from Mark Gokavi**



 **SOCIAL MEDIA: **Follow** Mark Gokavi on Twitter or Facebook**



 ** **DOWNLOAD OUR FREE MOBILE APPS****







About the Author

