20 YEARS OF



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







Show all languages



20 YEARS OF



Show all languages



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







12 Jan 2021



Share



12 Jan 2021  Author:

    Ana Swanson, Christopher Buckley, The New York Times



"Chinese Solar Companies Tied to Use of Forced Labor", 8 January 2021



... According to a report by the consultancy Horizon Advisory, Xinjiang’s
rising solar energy technology sector is connected to a broad program of
assigned labor in China, including methods that fit well-documented patterns
of forced labor.



Major solar companies including GCL-Poly, East Hope Group, Daqo New Energy,
Xinte Energy and Jinko Solar are named in the report as bearing signs of using
some forced labor, according to Horizon Advisory, which specializes in
Chinese-language research...



The Chinese government disputes the presence of any forced labor in its supply
chains, arguing that employment is voluntary. The companies named in the
report either did not respond to requests for comment or denied any role in
forced labor.



In a statement, a representative for the Chinese Embassy in Washington called
forced labor in Xinjiang “a rumor created by a few anti-China media and
organizations,” adding that all workers in Xinjiang enter into contracts in
accordance with Chinese labor law. “There is no such thing as ‘forced labor,’”
the representative said...



Together, the solar companies named in the report supply more than a third of
the world’s polysilicon, which is refined from rock and turned into the solar
panels that end up on rooftops and utility energy projects, including those in
the United States and Europe.



GCL-Poly, Daqo New Energy, Xinte Energy and East Hope Group did not respond to
multiple requests for comment.



Ian McCaleb, a spokesman for Jinko Solar, said the company “strongly condemns
the use of forced labor, and does not engage in it in its hiring practices or
workplace operations.” He said that it had reviewed the claims in the Horizon
report and “found that they do not demonstrate forced labor in our
facilities.”



The growing scrutiny of the region has already prompted changes among some
companies whose supply chains are entangled in these programs...The solar
sector could face similar pressure. The industry has deep ties to Xinjiang,
which accounts for about 40 percent of global polysilicon production, said
Jenny Chase, the head of solar analysis at BloombergNEF...



Roth Capital says 3 gigawatts of modules have been held; Disruption in trade
may slow renewables expansion in America



Companies say they fear the law that came into effect Tuesday aiming to
prevent shipping of goods using forced labour is difficult and costly to
comply with



Retailers highlighting issue of forced labor face backlash from Chinese
consumers



Kagome first major Japanese corporation to cut ties over Uyghur issue



Investors are putting pressure on Western companies over alleged human rights
abuses in China’s Xinjiang region, requesting more information about supply
chains and urging companies to act to prevent abuse.



China National Textile and Apparel Council (CNTAC) says in a statement that
some foreign brands are suspected of violating human rights in China’s
Xinjiang by excluding Xinjiang cotton and its products from their supply
chains in the name of so-called supply chain compliance.



This report examines the extent to which the forced labour of Uyghurs and
other ethnic minority groups in the Xinjiang is contributing to UK value
chains. It also makes a series of recommendations to the Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) for ensuring that UK
businesses do not profit from human rights abuses.



Apple, Inditex, Nike and PVH provided responses to the Coalition’s disclosure
request. Adidas, Amazon, Campbell Soup, Coca-Cola, Gap, Heinz, Kohl’s, L
Brands, Nordstrom, Ross, Target, TJX and Walmart have not provided responses
to the Coalition’s disclosure request.



The report said that the cotton textile industry in the region has made
remarkable progress in creating jobs, increasing farmers' income and improving
people's living standard.



Swedish public procurer SKL Kommentus Inköpscentral, the Swedish Regions and
the Church of Sweden have produced a joint letter requiring their suppliers to
take certain actions following concerns over the Uyghur forced labour.



The State Department declared that the Chinese government is committing
genocide and crimes against humanity through its wide-scale repression of
Uighurs and other predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in its northwestern
region of Xinjiang, including in its use of internment camps and forced
sterilization.



The withhold-release order will apply to products including apparel, textiles,
tomato seeds, canned tomatoes and tomato sauce, and will apply at all US ports
of entry



A new report shows some of the world’s biggest solar companies work with the
Chinese government to absorb workers from Xinjiang, programs that are often
seen as a red flag for forced labor.



New documents show Lens Technology, which makes iPhone glass and is owned by
China’s richest woman, received Uighur Muslim laborers transferred from
Xinjiang.



Following mounting evidence on human rights abuses of Uyghur workers and other
ethnic minorities from a range of credible sources and concerns from civil
society organizations, the FLA banned its members from sourcing from Xinjiang,
China, a first in its 20 year history.



An internal report claims the face-scanning system could trigger a ‘Uighur
alarm,’ sparking concerns that the software could help fuel China’s crackdown
on the mostly Muslim minority group.



Business groups and major companies like Apple have been pressing Congress to
alter legislation cracking down on imports of goods made with forced labor
from persecuted Muslim minorities in China.



The solar industry's growing dependence on China's autonomous Xinjiang region
for a critical raw material poses mounting risks to a wide range of companies
as the U.S. government moves to confront Beijing over alleged human rights
abuses there.



The recent refusal by five international auditing firms to inspect for labor
abuses in Xinjiang is a moment for the auditing and certifications industry to
rethink its approach to “social audits” everywhere.



Human Rights Now announced its report, which raises the possibility of
Japanese companies’ indirect involvement in forced labour of Uyghurs through
their supply chains and urges them to take immediate action



This report gives evidence of the gaps in the current European Union (EU)
export regulation framework for digital surveillance technologies and provides
the EU institutions and its member states with actionable recommendations to
improve the protections of human rights in the upcoming Recast Dual Use
Regulation. Amnesty International investigated the exports of digital
surveillance technologies from Europe to China, a country that (mis)uses its
criminal law system to restrict human rights.



Roth Capital says 3 gigawatts of modules have been held; Disruption in trade
may slow renewables expansion in America



Companies say they fear the law that came into effect Tuesday aiming to
prevent shipping of goods using forced labour is difficult and costly to
comply with



Retailers highlighting issue of forced labor face backlash from Chinese
consumers



Kagome first major Japanese corporation to cut ties over Uyghur issue



Investors are putting pressure on Western companies over alleged human rights
abuses in China’s Xinjiang region, requesting more information about supply
chains and urging companies to act to prevent abuse.



China National Textile and Apparel Council (CNTAC) says in a statement that
some foreign brands are suspected of violating human rights in China’s
Xinjiang by excluding Xinjiang cotton and its products from their supply
chains in the name of so-called supply chain compliance.



This report examines the extent to which the forced labour of Uyghurs and
other ethnic minority groups in the Xinjiang is contributing to UK value
chains. It also makes a series of recommendations to the Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) for ensuring that UK
businesses do not profit from human rights abuses.



Apple, Inditex, Nike and PVH provided responses to the Coalition’s disclosure
request. Adidas, Amazon, Campbell Soup, Coca-Cola, Gap, Heinz, Kohl’s, L
Brands, Nordstrom, Ross, Target, TJX and Walmart have not provided responses
to the Coalition’s disclosure request.



The report said that the cotton textile industry in the region has made
remarkable progress in creating jobs, increasing farmers' income and improving
people's living standard.



Swedish public procurer SKL Kommentus Inköpscentral, the Swedish Regions and
the Church of Sweden have produced a joint letter requiring their suppliers to
take certain actions following concerns over the Uyghur forced labour.



The State Department declared that the Chinese government is committing
genocide and crimes against humanity through its wide-scale repression of
Uighurs and other predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in its northwestern
region of Xinjiang, including in its use of internment camps and forced
sterilization.



The withhold-release order will apply to products including apparel, textiles,
tomato seeds, canned tomatoes and tomato sauce, and will apply at all US ports
of entry



A new report shows some of the world’s biggest solar companies work with the
Chinese government to absorb workers from Xinjiang, programs that are often
seen as a red flag for forced labor.



New documents show Lens Technology, which makes iPhone glass and is owned by
China’s richest woman, received Uighur Muslim laborers transferred from
Xinjiang.



Following mounting evidence on human rights abuses of Uyghur workers and other
ethnic minorities from a range of credible sources and concerns from civil
society organizations, the FLA banned its members from sourcing from Xinjiang,
China, a first in its 20 year history.



An internal report claims the face-scanning system could trigger a ‘Uighur
alarm,’ sparking concerns that the software could help fuel China’s crackdown
on the mostly Muslim minority group.



Business groups and major companies like Apple have been pressing Congress to
alter legislation cracking down on imports of goods made with forced labor
from persecuted Muslim minorities in China.



The solar industry's growing dependence on China's autonomous Xinjiang region
for a critical raw material poses mounting risks to a wide range of companies
as the U.S. government moves to confront Beijing over alleged human rights
abuses there.



The recent refusal by five international auditing firms to inspect for labor
abuses in Xinjiang is a moment for the auditing and certifications industry to
rethink its approach to “social audits” everywhere.



Human Rights Now announced its report, which raises the possibility of
Japanese companies’ indirect involvement in forced labour of Uyghurs through
their supply chains and urges them to take immediate action



This report gives evidence of the gaps in the current European Union (EU)
export regulation framework for digital surveillance technologies and provides
the EU institutions and its member states with actionable recommendations to
improve the protections of human rights in the upcoming Recast Dual Use
Regulation. Amnesty International investigated the exports of digital
surveillance technologies from Europe to China, a country that (mis)uses its
criminal law system to restrict human rights.



Roth Capital says 3 gigawatts of modules have been held; Disruption in trade
may slow renewables expansion in America



Companies say they fear the law that came into effect Tuesday aiming to
prevent shipping of goods using forced labour is difficult and costly to
comply with



Retailers highlighting issue of forced labor face backlash from Chinese
consumers



Kagome first major Japanese corporation to cut ties over Uyghur issue



Investors are putting pressure on Western companies over alleged human rights
abuses in China’s Xinjiang region, requesting more information about supply
chains and urging companies to act to prevent abuse.



China National Textile and Apparel Council (CNTAC) says in a statement that
some foreign brands are suspected of violating human rights in China’s
Xinjiang by excluding Xinjiang cotton and its products from their supply
chains in the name of so-called supply chain compliance.



This report examines the extent to which the forced labour of Uyghurs and
other ethnic minority groups in the Xinjiang is contributing to UK value
chains. It also makes a series of recommendations to the Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) for ensuring that UK
businesses do not profit from human rights abuses.



Apple, Inditex, Nike and PVH provided responses to the Coalition’s disclosure
request. Adidas, Amazon, Campbell Soup, Coca-Cola, Gap, Heinz, Kohl’s, L
Brands, Nordstrom, Ross, Target, TJX and Walmart have not provided responses
to the Coalition’s disclosure request.



The report said that the cotton textile industry in the region has made
remarkable progress in creating jobs, increasing farmers' income and improving
people's living standard.



Swedish public procurer SKL Kommentus Inköpscentral, the Swedish Regions and
the Church of Sweden have produced a joint letter requiring their suppliers to
take certain actions following concerns over the Uyghur forced labour.



The State Department declared that the Chinese government is committing
genocide and crimes against humanity through its wide-scale repression of
Uighurs and other predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in its northwestern
region of Xinjiang, including in its use of internment camps and forced
sterilization.



The withhold-release order will apply to products including apparel, textiles,
tomato seeds, canned tomatoes and tomato sauce, and will apply at all US ports
of entry



A new report shows some of the world’s biggest solar companies work with the
Chinese government to absorb workers from Xinjiang, programs that are often
seen as a red flag for forced labor.



New documents show Lens Technology, which makes iPhone glass and is owned by
China’s richest woman, received Uighur Muslim laborers transferred from
Xinjiang.



Following mounting evidence on human rights abuses of Uyghur workers and other
ethnic minorities from a range of credible sources and concerns from civil
society organizations, the FLA banned its members from sourcing from Xinjiang,
China, a first in its 20 year history.



An internal report claims the face-scanning system could trigger a ‘Uighur
alarm,’ sparking concerns that the software could help fuel China’s crackdown
on the mostly Muslim minority group.



Business groups and major companies like Apple have been pressing Congress to
alter legislation cracking down on imports of goods made with forced labor
from persecuted Muslim minorities in China.



The solar industry's growing dependence on China's autonomous Xinjiang region
for a critical raw material poses mounting risks to a wide range of companies
as the U.S. government moves to confront Beijing over alleged human rights
abuses there.



The recent refusal by five international auditing firms to inspect for labor
abuses in Xinjiang is a moment for the auditing and certifications industry to
rethink its approach to “social audits” everywhere.



This report gives evidence of the gaps in the current European Union (EU)
export regulation framework for digital surveillance technologies and provides
the EU institutions and its member states with actionable recommendations to
improve the protections of human rights in the upcoming Recast Dual Use
Regulation. Amnesty International investigated the exports of digital
surveillance technologies from Europe to China, a country that (mis)uses its
criminal law system to restrict human rights.



20 YEARS OF



Events | Jobs | Media | Data Usage & Cookies | Contact Us



Disclaimer: Business & Human Rights Resource Centre and its collaborative
partners take no position on the diverse views presented in linked material
within the database, nor can we guarantee the factual accuracy of all the
articles and reports we make available. The appearance of such links does not
constitute endorsement of the websites they lead to or the information
contained therein, over which we exercise no editorial control.



 **Business & Human Rights Resource Centre** Registered Charity in England &
Wales no. 1096664, 501(c)(3) non-profit organization in USA and registered
charitable association (e.V.) in Germany (VR 38088 B).

