The Swiss investigation into the mining giant comes on top of probes in the US
and the UK.



Switzerland has opened a corruption investigation into mining and commodity
giant Glencore and its activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.



Glencore, one of the world’s largest companies, announced earlier this month
that Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General is probing the company’s
“failure to have the organizational measures in place to prevent alleged
corruption” in the DRC.



Swiss-based Glencore said it would cooperate with the investigation. It is
reportedly the biggest western company operating in the DRC, Africa’s largest
copper producer and a source of much of the world’s cobalt.



The Swiss investigation comes on top of probes in the United States and the
United Kingdom into compliance with the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and
money-laundering and other laws.



Glencore, which owns and controls mines as well as oil and grain subsidiaries
around the world, has long faced — and denied – accusations of financial
wrongdoing, pollution and labor violations.



In 2017, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists and media
partners revealed as part of the Paradise Papers investigation that Glencore
provided a $45 million loan to a company controlled by a businessman then
negotiating a mining deal with DRC officials. The businessman, Israeli
millionaire Daniel Gertler, nurtured close ties to Congolese politicians.



Following the publication of the Paradise Papers, the U.S. Treasury sanctioned
Gertler for having “amassed his fortune through hundreds of millions of
dollars’ worth of opaque and corrupt mining and oil deals.” Gertler denies
wrongdoing.



Federal prosecutors launched the probe into Glencore following a complaint
submitted in December 2017 by nonprofit Public Eye, according to ICIJ media
partner Tamedia. In its complaint, Public Eye said that ICIJ’s Paradise Papers
investigation “brought new explosive elements of this high-risk partnership to
light.”



Senior reporter and Africa coordinator



Help us change the world. Get our stories by email.



1800 M Street NW, Front 1 #33019  
Washington, D.C. 20033 USA



**contact@icij.org **



**© 2022 — The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. ** All
rights reserved.

