You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable,
please install an RSS reader.



All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under
an open access license. No special permission is required to reuse all or part
of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables. For articles
published under an open access Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the
article may be reused without permission provided that the original article is
clearly cited. For more information, please refer to
https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess.



Feature Papers represent the most advanced research with significant potential
for high impact in the field. Feature Papers are submitted upon individual
invitation or recommendation by the scientific editors and undergo peer review
prior to publication.



The Feature Paper can be either an original research article, a substantial
novel research study that often involves several techniques or approaches, or
a comprehensive review paper with concise and precise updates on the latest
progress in the field that systematically reviews the most exciting advances
in scientific literature. This type of paper provides an outlook on future
directions of research or possible applications.



Editorâ€™s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific
editors of MDPI journals from around the world. Editors select a small number
of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be
particularly interesting to readers, or important in the respective research
area. The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the most exciting work
published in the various research areas of the journal.



Find support for a specific problem in the support section of our website.



Please let us know what you think of our products and services.



Visit our dedicated information section to learn more about MDPI.





Oliveira, M.L.S.; Akinyemi, S.A.; Nyakuma, B.B.; Dotto, G.L. Environmental
Impacts of Coal Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated Mine Areas in Colombia.
_Sustainability_ **2022** , _14_ , 4544. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Oliveira MLS, Akinyemi SA, Nyakuma BB, Dotto GL. Environmental Impacts of Coal
Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated Mine Areas in Colombia. _Sustainability_.
2022; 14(8):4544. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Oliveira, Marcos L. S., Segun A. Akinyemi, Bemgba B. Nyakuma, and Guilherme L.
Dotto. 2022. "Environmental Impacts of Coal Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated
Mine Areas in Colombia" _Sustainability_ 14, no. 8: 4544.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Oliveira, M.L.S.; Akinyemi, S.A.; Nyakuma, B.B.; Dotto, G.L. Environmental
Impacts of Coal Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated Mine Areas in Colombia.
_Sustainability_ **2022** , _14_ , 4544. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Oliveira MLS, Akinyemi SA, Nyakuma BB, Dotto GL. Environmental Impacts of Coal
Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated Mine Areas in Colombia. _Sustainability_.
2022; 14(8):4544. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Oliveira, Marcos L. S., Segun A. Akinyemi, Bemgba B. Nyakuma, and Guilherme L.
Dotto. 2022. "Environmental Impacts of Coal Nanoparticles from Rehabilitated
Mine Areas in Colombia" _Sustainability_ 14, no. 8: 4544.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084544



Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI
journals

